+++
title = "VAsudevAchArya study"
+++


COMPUTERISED 
YADAVABHYUDAYA -A STUDY 
BY 
N. V. VASUDEVACHARIAR, MA, Siromanı 
THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS 
FOR THE AWARD OF THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 
FEBRUARY, 1984 
PAGES 
CHAPTER VII: VISISTADVAITA CONCEPTS 
137-148 
CHAPTER VIII: PHILOSOPHY 
149-162 
CHAPTER IX: 
COMMENTATOR 
163-190 
CHAPTER X: 
CONCLUSION 
191-225 
APPENDIX I: 
LIST OF ALANKARAS 
APPENDIX II: 
LIST OF CHITRABANDHAS 
APPENDIX IIT: 
LIST OF CHITRAS 
APPENDIX TV: 
LIST OF YAMAKAS 
APDIX V: 
METCAL ANALYSIS 
APMEDA VI: 
GRAPET CAL PULARIT LES 
SRI 
CHAPTER · I 
VEDANTA DESIKA 
HIS LIFE AND WORKS 
1 
ŚRI VEDANTA DEŠIKA HIS LIFE AND WORKS 
Venkatanatha popularly known as Vedanta Desika 
flourished in the latter half of the 13th century, about 
250 years after Ramanuja, the great exponent of Visistadvaita. 
According to tradition, Vedanta Desika is considered as 
Ghantavatara, the divine descent of the bell in the shrine of śrī Venkatesvara of Tirumalai. He is also considered 
as the avatara of Lord Venkatesvara himself or the avatara of Ramanuja. This is stated by Desika in his Sankalpa- 
1 
survodaya, by his son, Kumara Varadācārya in his 
2 
Desikamangalasasana and by other writers. 
3 Desika's 
spiritual descent is traced to Ramanuja, through two lines 
of Acaryas Appullar, Rangaraja, Ramanuja (Atreya) and Kidambi Accan. Venkatanatha was born in 1268 A.D. at 
Tupil, a suburb of Kañcipuram as the son of Anatasuri 
Somayājī, an orthodox Vaisnava and a descendant of one of the 74 Simhasanadhipatie's appointed by Ramanuja.5 His mother was Totaramba, the sister of Atreya Ramanuja 
who had the title Vadihamsambuvaha and was popularly 
known as Appullar. 
As the parents had no children for a long time, they proceeded to Tirumalai. One night, Lord Venkatesvara 
2 
appeared before them in a dream and gave the temple 
bell to be swallowed by Totaramba, as the result of 
which Venkatanatha was born. Even as a child, Venkata- 
natha possessed a prodigious memory and remarkable 
powers of intellect. It is said, that, one day, when 
he was five years old, Venkatanatha followed his uncle 
to the temple of Lord Varadaraja, where the great scholar 
Nagadur Ammal (Vatsya Varadacarya) was delivering discourse on Sribhasyam, to his disciples. Those who were 
present there, were lost in admiration at the beaming 
countenance of the young boy and the discourse then, 
was a bit interrupted. As Nadadur Ammal began to resume 
the discourse, he found that he had missed the thread 
in the discourse. This was correctly pointed out by 
the five year old boy Venkatanatha. Nagadur Amal 
immediately blessed the boy with his prophetic utterance 
stating that the boy would undoubtedly rise to heights 
of eminence, refuting all the systems of thought opposed 
to Ramanuja's philosophy and establishing the verities 
of Vedanta. 
6 
Under tre guidance of his uncle Appullar 
Desika mustered all the Sastras even before he attained 
the age of twenty. 
7 
He must have composed poems and 
certain works while he was at Kanci. This is evidenced 
by the title Kavitarkikakesari. 
8 
It is to acquire superior skill in handling the 
abstruse philosophical matters and meet the opponents 
in debates, that he practised the Garudamantra taught 
to him by his uncle. This Garudamantra was practised 
at Oṣadhi hills, at Tiruvahindrapuram. Garuda taught 
in turn, the Hayagrivemantra which Venkatanatha repeated 
and Lord Hayagriva appeared before him. With the 
blessings of Hayagriva, Venkatanatha was able to acquire 
mastery in literature and science and was endowed 
with superb dialectical skill. With the grace of 
Hayagrīva, he was able to silence many an opponent 
and produce works of enduring worth on Ramarija's system. 
Venkaţanatha spent his life in unceasing activity 
by imparting the tenets of Ramanuja's system to numerous 
disciples and also by undertaking pilgrimages to holy places like Tirumalai, Srirangam, etc. His Sastraic works like Śatadusani, Adhikarapasaravali and others 
9 
won for him the coveted title of Vedantacarya conferred upon him by Śri Ranganatha while his multifarious 
activities as in Silpa and other sciences got him the 
10 
title Sarvatantrasvatantra from the Goddess at srirangam. 
His works! 
The works of Vedanta Desika are manifold in quality 
and quantity numbering more than hundred. He wrote in 
Sanskrit, Tamil and Manipravala, a mixture of Sanskrit 
11 
and Tamil. 
Sanskrit Works: 
1. Original Philosophical Works: 
1. Tattva-mukta-kalapa with the commentary 
Sarvarthasiddhi 
2. Adhikaran saravali 
3. Satadusani 
4. Nvavaparisuddhi 
5. Nyavasiddhaniana 
6. Sesviramimams a 
7. Mim insapaduka 
8. Nikseparaksā 
9. SaccaritriC NG A 
10. Pancarqurarak, 
11. Dramidorunisad-Tauperyaratnavali 
12. Dramidopenisa saram 
4 
II. Commentaries: 
1. Tattvatika (on Śrībhagya) 
2. Gadyatravabhasya 
3. Catusslokībhasya 
4. Stotraratnabhasya 
5. Gitarthasangraharaksa 
6. Gitabhasya-tatarva-candrika 
7. Isavasyopanisadbhagya 
III. Drama and Poetry: 
1. Sankalpasuryodaya 
2. Yadavabhyudaya 
3. Hamsasaniesa 
4. Subhasitanivi 
5. Fadukasanasra 
IV. Religious Works: 
1. Nyasadacake 
2. Nyasavimsat 
3. Nyasatilakk 
V. Stotras in Präkyte and Sanskrit: 
1. Havarivastotre 
2. Dravatarastotra 
5 
3. Bhagavaddhvanasopana 
4. Gomlavinsati 5. áriátuti 
6. Bhustuti 
7. Godastuti 
8. Davasataka 
6 
9. Abhitistavam 
2 
10. Devanavaka-pancasat 
11. Varadarajapancasat 
12. Vegasethustotra 
13. Astabhulastaka 
14. Kamasikastaka 
15. Paramartastuti 16. Saraparatidipika 
17. Acvutasataka 
18. Dehallanstuti 
19. Raghuviragadva 
20. Sudarsanastaka 
21. Sodasavudhastotra 
22. Garudadandaka 
23. Yatiraiesentati 
24. Vatrevenoncoka 
25. Garudanencasat 
VI. Manipravala: 
1. Sampradava parisuddhi 
2. Tattvapadavi 
3. Rahasya padavi 
4. Tattvanavanita 
5. Rahasvanavanita 
6. Tattvamatrka 
7. Rahasyamatrka 
8. Tattvasandes 
9. Rahasvasandesa 
10. Rahasyasandesa vivarana 
11. Tattvaratnavali 
12. Tattvaratnav lisangraha 
7 
13. Rahasyaratnavali 
14. Rahasyaratnavalihrdays 
15. Tattvatravaculaka 
16. Rahasyatravaculak 
17. Abhayapradanasara 
18. Rahasyasi khamani 
19. Anialivaibhava 
20. Pradhan4sataka21. Upakara sangraha 
22. Sarasangraha 
23. Munivahanabhoga 
24. Paranapadasopana 
25. Paramatabhanga 
26. Hastigirimliitmya 
27. Brimdr hasvatravasara 
28. Sarasara 
29. Virodha Parihara 
VII. Works in Tamil Poems: (Desikaprabhanda) 
Amrta raniani 
1. 
2. 
Adhikarasangraha 
3. Artisvadini 
4. 
Paramanedasopana 
5. Meivritaminmiva 
6. Adaikkalapattu 
7. Arthanancaka 
8. Srivaimava dinegeri 
9. Tirucing t 
10. 
Fangirunern 
11. Tirunantir ceurikku 
12. Drawer ky 
13. Carmslokaccurykky 
8 
14. Gitartha sangraha 
15. 
Mummanikkoval 
16. 
Navamanimalai 
17. 
Prabhandasara 
18. Abaraniyaza 
VIII. Other Works: 
1. Haridinatilaka 
2. Taisvadevakarika 
3. Iaiñopavita pratistha 
4. Bhugolenirpaya 
IX. 
Works that are lost: 
1. Adhikarapadarpana (mentioned in the Nikeyaparak 12 
2. Cakarasamarthana (referred to in the Vaibhavaprakai 
3. Samasyasahasra (mentioned in the Stotraratnabhara) 
4. Vedarthasangrahavakhrana (mentioned in the last 
pariccheda of the Nyavasiddhaniara) 15 
5. Madurakivi daya (Manipravala) 
6. Nigamaparimala ( 
7. Bilparthasara 
8. Stevivirodha 
> 
(18) 74 
9 
Desika's chief aim in writing such verks was to 
exemplify the tenets of Ramanuja's system, rather of 
Vaippavism, to humanity in every possible way, employing 
the language and form suited for the purpose. 
He was a great exponent of Ubhava Yedants, treating 
the Upanisadie matter along with the hymns of the Mvars, 
He demonstrated in his works the concord between the 
Upandwads and the hymns of Nammalvar. He was a staunch 
advocate of the doctrine of surrender (Prapatti). 
Vedanta Desika passed away in November 1369, on 
the Kärttikai day having lived a full span of 101 years, 
He was a saint full of humility and an unbounded love 
for the welfare of humanity. He rightly occupies a 
supreme place next to Ramarmja, in the hierarchy of Acaryas. 
A Brief Summary of the Important Works of Vedanta Deźika! 
I. Tattva-mukta-kalāna : 
This work in five chapters contains 500 verses in 
Bragdhara metre. This was written with the object of 
presenting the doctrines of all systems of thought 
including Advaita, Hynya, Mimänsä, Bauddha, Jaina and 
10 
ether systems. The conclusions drawn are in favour of Visistadvaita. In fact, this is a veritable 
encyclopaedia. The author has written his own 
16 commentary on it - Sarvarthasiddhi. 
II. Adhikarapagaravali: 
This is a metrical composition giving a gist of 
each Adhikarana of the Brahma-sutra-bhasya on the 
lines of Ramanuja's interpretation. This consists 
of 562 verses in Sragdhara metre. 
III. Śatadusanī: 
This is aimed at the refutation of the Advaitio 
doctrines. There are only 66 sections available at 
present. The remaining sections are not available 
and are lost to posterity. 
IV. Nyavaparisuddhis 
In this work, the author seeks to show that Gautama, 
the author of the Nvayasutras, was in favour of 
Vedanta system. The several categories are expounded 
in four chapters so as to fall in line with the 
11 
Visitadvaita principles. Copious citations are 
contained in this work from the early writers, some 
of whose works are now lost. 
V. Nyavasiddhaniana: 
This is purely a Visitadvaita work presented in five 
chapters on the metaphysical principles with the back- 
ground of Vedanta. This is incomplete and contains 
citations from the works of early writers. 
VI. Sesvaranimansa: 
The author tries to prove that the Mimamsa system as handed down and developed by Sabarasvamin, Kumarila 
and Prabhakara are not in consonance with the aim and 
intention of the author of Mimamsa sutras. The author 
left it incomplete probably to show the way in which 
further studies in Mimamsa could be taken up. 
VII. Miramsanaduka: 
This is a metrical treatise consisting of 173 verses 
summarizing the tenets of the Mimamsa system as 
accepted in the Vedanta tradition. 
12 
VIII Nieparaka 
IX 
X 
This is a treatise to prove that prapatti or self- 
surrender is the upay or the means for obtaining 
final release. The prima facie and giddhants are 
stated here. The treatment is on Sastraie lines. 
Saccaritrarak a: 
This is an independent work dealing in three sections 
with the ways and means for leading a disciplined life 
as a Vaisnava. 
Pancaratrarak 
This work presents the validity of the Pancaratra 
system in three sections. 
XI & XII. Dramidopants attatparvaratnavali and 
Dramidopanis adaara': 
The Ratnavali gives in 130 verses in Sanskrit the 
gist of Nammalvar's Tiruvāizoshi. The gara gives 
the gist for each decade of Tinavaimozhi and consists 
of 26 verses. Indeed it is Desika who raised the 
Tiruvaimozhi to its supreme position by these works. 
COMMENTARIES: 
1. 
Tattvatika: 
This is a voluminous commentary on dri Bhaya of 
Ramanuja, but it has been left incomplete abruptly 
in the first Adhikarang itself, 
13 
2. Gadvatrave bhagya 
This is a commentary on three Gadyas of Sri Ramanuja Saranagatigadya, Sri Rangagadva and Vaikunthagadva, which deal with the importance of Sarapagati. 
3. Catusslokibha's ya' 
This is a commentary on the Catussloki of Yamunacarya dealing with the significance of Sri, the consort of 
Lord Visnu. 
4. Stotraratnabha'sya: 
This is a clear exposition of the Stotraratna of Yamunacarya which deals with the tenets of Visistadvaita. The commentaries on Gadvatrava, Catussloki and Stotr 
ratna come under the title Rahasyarakṣa as they deal 
with the esoteric doctrines of Visistadvaita. 
5. Gitarthasangraharaksa: 
This is a commentary on Gitarthasangraha of Yamunacarya. 
6. Tatparvacandrika: 
This is a detailed commentary on Ramanuja's bhasya 
on the Bhagavadgita. This is invaluable for the 
meticulous care with which every word in the bhasya 
of Ramanuja receives an appropriate and authentic 
exposition. 
14 
7. Isevasyopant's adbhagya 
This is a commentary on the Isavasyopanisad according to Visistadvaita. 
III. Drama and Poetry: 
Drama Sankalpasuryodaya: 
The play consists of ten acts and the significance 
of the title that God's will 'Sankalpa' 18 
essential for humanity, is dealt with. The view 
of the Advaitins that mere knowledge of prabodha 
will suffice is rejected. 
2. Yadavabhyudaya : 
This is a Mahakavva in 24 cantos on the life of 
Krspa. 
3. Hamsasandesa: 
This is a lyrical work on the model of Kalidasa's 
Meghadute and contains the message sent by Rama 
through Hamsa to Sita on learning the whereabouts 
of Sita from Hanuman. 
4. Subhasitanivi: 
This is a didactic composition containing wise sayings spread over 12 sections, of 144 slokas. 
15 
5. Padukasahasra: 
This is a grand poem consisting of 1008 verses in 
32 sections where the sandals of Lord Ranganatha are 
glorified. The author displays all his poetic powers 
of imagination reflecting his devotion to Nammalvar. 
IV. Religious Works: 
V. 
Nyasadasaka, Nyasayimsati, Nyasatilaka. These three 
deal with prapatti. Desika comments on 
While his son, Kumara Varadacarya has written a commentary 
on Nyasatilaka. 
Stotras: 
Except Acvutasataka,which is in Prakt, all the other 
stotras are in Sanskrit. Raghuvaragadva is in prose. 
The deities in the important shrines in South India 
get their personal attractiveness and eminence 
glorified in many of these stotras. A special 
reference is to be made to Davasataka where Lord 
Srinivasa's mercy gets a detailed and all comprehensive 
description. 
Vairagyapancake: 
This poem reveals the intensity of Vairagya in the life of Desika. 
16 
VI. Manipravala: 
It is a form of style in which there is a melodious 
blending of Sanskrit and Tamil expressions. This 
style was at first started by Ramanuja's spiritual 
son Tirukurukaipniran Pillan, who commented on 
the Tiruvaimozhi of Nammalvar by employing this mode 
of writing. 
People in those days had sufficient knowledge of 
Sanskrit expressions current in daily life. When 
these got freely mixed up with the Tamil expressions 
a new style came into being. The Rahasyatravasare 
which is considered as the magnum opus of Fedanta 
Desika written in this Manipravala style contains 
32 sections and deals with the three Rahasyas with 
preliminary chapters on prapatti. 
There are nearly 30 small tracts, all conveying 
the Vaisnavaite tenets in varying grades so as to 
enable people to take up the study of the smallest 
and simplest works at first and proceed further to 
the study of other works in a graded manner. 
Under this head, three works deserve mention, 
One is Munivahanabhoga which is a commentary 
174. 
Bhugolanirgava deals with aspects of earth in the 
global area. 
All these are in verse forms. 
19 
NOTES 
20 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Sankalpasuryodaya, I, 14 
vitrasini vibudhaveirivaruthininam 
padmasanena paricaravidhau prayukta 
utpreksvate budhajanai rupa pattibhumna 
ghanta hareḥ samajanişta yadatmaneti 
Desi kamangalasasana, 1.4. Kumaravaradācārya. 
venkatesavataro'yam tad ghantams o'thava bhavet 
yatindram so'thavetyevam vitarkyay@stu mangalam. 
Vaibhavaprakasika, Śl.2. Colasimhupuram Doggayacarya. 
venkatesasya sankalpat visvamitrakulambudhau 
ghaptavotirna yanmurtye tam desikavaram bha je. Saptatir tnamulika, Śl.8-10. P.R.Annan. 
sarvalantrasvɔtentr tvacchās tradīpapr.dhānata 
srivenkatadrinatho' sau sākṣadvedant desihap Acaryacampu, 1.56. Kausika Srinivasacharya. 
muktāv dāt.rucipūr quvitritāsā 
ghantar hunatra bhvata k litāvētārā 
Sarvajn nirjaradhuniv vasundharayam 
sanjiv yişvati tin koluşanalena. 
4. 
Prapatartihara 
Atreta Ramanuja 
Rangaraja 
RĀMĀNUJA 
Appullor 
Tirukkurukaipoiranpillan 
Vicpucitta 
Nadadur Ammal 
Desika 
5. Saptatiratnamalika, 1.10. P.R. Anum 
V 
bhadrapadamast vispuvimal skşe 
venkatamahidhran titirth din bhute 
pradur-bhova jag ti dit veripugh pt 
hant kvitärkik 'mprendr qurumurtya 
6. This prediction and the blessing true is 15 
evident from Act IT of the Sankalpasuryodaya. 
The Sloka 14 (same is in the Yotirotti) 
is in pr is of Ramanuj. 
21 
The disciple who utters this was blessed by Ramarija: 
pratisthapitavedantab pratikgiptabahirmatab 
bhuyastrividyamanyastvam bhurikalyanabh¬janam 
(Act II, 15) 
The disciple is Desika himself. Many Slokis similar 
to the ones in Act II, (7, 8, 14, 49) occur in the 
other works of the uthor. 
7. Sankalpasuryodaya, Act I, 1.15, Adyar edition. 
8. Hayagrivastotra, 1.33 
kavitarkika kesarina venkatanathena vir citāmetām 
vide: Yatiraiasaptati, 72 
kavitarki kasimhanadab 
Gautapancasat, 52. 
kavaikathakaghatake sari venkatesab 
Acvutasatakam 101. 
iti kavitarkiakesarivedantacaryavenkatesa - 
vir citam 
9. Adhikarapasaravall, 
$1.1 
Vaibhavanrakasika, $1.53 
Saptatiratnamilika, Ś1.31 
22 
10. Vaibhavaprakasika, 81.54 
Saptatiratnamalika, 81.31 
11. For detailed reference vide section VI below. 
12. Nikseparaksa, p. 94, Uttamur T. Viraraghavachariar 
edition. 
13. Vaibhavaprakasika. Page 72 Maru pravola 
14. Samasya Sahasram 
Stotraratnabhasyante 'ntimaslokal 
svakamiti haridattam yamunastotravṛttya 
vyavrnuta nigamantacaryakam venkatesaḥ agani sadasi sadbhiryab samasyasahasri 
kavikathaka mrgendrah sarvatantrasvatantrap 
15. Nvavasiddhaniana, p.211. Published by the 
Śrī Vaisnava Siddhanta Prachara Sabha, Madras, 
1934. 
16. Santatiratnamalika, Ś1.48 
Vaibhavanrakasika, $1.60 
23 
CHAPTER - II 
YADAVABHYUDAYA 
- A SUMMARY 
YADAVABHYUDAYA A SUMMARY 
This Mahakavva is divided into 24 cantos consisting 
of 2643 gloka-s. It possesses all the requisite features 
of a Mahakavva. The author's aim in writing this kavya, besides recounting the life and exploits of śrī Krepa, 
is to present the theme with a philosophical background 
according to Ramanuja's system of Vedanta. It is therefore 
natural that one should come across a commingling of the 
narration of the events in the kavva style and the 
presentation of the philosophic aspects woven with the 
events. 
CANTO I 
This begins with a prayer to Krspa as a divin 
descent of Vispu with the amiable qualities that attract 
people to him. After making a reference to Vyasa's 
handling of the life of Krsna, the author traces the 
ancestry of Kyspa to the lunar race. The achievements 
and ideals of this family are well portrayed suggesting 
the birth of the Lord in that family. The approach of 
the Gods along with Godcess Earth to the Lord for 
obtaining relief from the oppression of Kamsa and the 
other asaras is then detailed, along with a sufficient 
elabor tion of the Lord's greatness, as present in the 
24 
Upanisadic doctrines. After a brief descrition of 
the Lord reclining on the serpent couch, the appeal 
of the dev-3 is depicted, followed by the Lord's 
231urance to extend his protection to them and his 
resolve to take his descent in Mathura as the son 
of Vasudeva and Devaki. 
CATO II 
25 
The second canto is devoted to a graphic description 
of nature bised on much imaginative display of portio 
t-lents, with the darkness setting in following sun set 
and the rising of the moon with its ef ect on nature and 
people. Reference is made to Vasudeva and his wife Devaki 
whom the Lord had chosen as his parents. Devaki's pregnant 
tion is also spoken of at the beginning.1 
CO' 
C .10 II 
The birth of app is described in this cinto against 
the caround of the 'ecriction of nature presented at 
the elk of the pious eo. The Florious quearance of 
A 
-3 
. 
our areas at one time of his birth 
VI H rufwand priver.? 
At the request of his parents Krapa took the form 
of an ordinary child. In order to save the child from 
the cruelty of Kamsa, Vasudeva took it and went to 
Gokula amidst the fragrant breeze, crossing the helpful 
Yamuna. Placing the child in the house of Nandagopa by 
the side of Yasoda, who had then given birth to a female 
child, Vasudeva took the female child and hastened back 
and left the child by the side of Devaki. Kamsa who 
came to know of the birth of a child to Devaki tried 
to slay that child who was Maya, but was met with 
disappointment. Escaping from the hands of Kamsa, it 
flew up into the sky. Assuming the form of a maiden, 
Maya warned Kaisa of the evil times ahead and said that 
he would meet with his death the hands of the child, 
then lying with Yesort Gokula. 
CANTO IV 
Kamsa was seriously cons. ring plans to subject 
the child Krops to all mins of cruel attacks by his own 
wicked scrollers. The vy first that came to kill 
Krope was Putani, Cess. This was follow-d by the alemit of Sakaycourt, boun these were easily destroyed. 
26 
Mention is made of the pranks of Krapa as a child where 
his divinity is revealed, especially of his sportive 
pranks in the stealing of butter which brought him the 
name Damodara being bound by dama (rope). 
As a result of 111 omens, Krspa took all the people 
to Brndavana which became a happy place to live in. Even 
here danger came in the form of Asuras - Travarta, Baka, 
Dhemuka, Pralamba and all these were destroyed. Krapa's 
sportive pranks with the maidens of the cowherds who 
3 
undertook to perform a Kanyavrata and His 11-s with 
the cowherdesses have a vivid portrayal. Following the 
tradition recorded in the Tamil classics, Krapa won the 
hand of Nila, the daughter of a cowherd Kumbha in a wager 
by subduing the seven fierce bulls. Krspa's playing on 
the flute enchanting the minds of the cowherdesses as 
well as the subduing of Kaliya serpent by Krspa's powerful 
dance on its head receives a rich depiction. It may be 
mentioned that in all his sports with the gopis, Krspa 
maintained his brahmacarya and never transgressed the 
rules of charms. 
CANTO V 
This whole canto is devoted to the description of 
the three seasons Grisma, Varga, Sarat. Krypa is shown 
27to have gone out for hunting in the forest of Brndavana. The cowherds chose the Sarat season for offering worship 
to Indra according to their custom. 
CANTO VI 
Krsna advised the cowherds to worship Govardhana hill 
instead of offering worship to Indra. The description 
of the hill takes up almost the entire canto. Here the 
anthor fully uses his skill in displaying his powers in handling the Sabdalankara-s. The author handles a variety 
of Citrabandha. Perhaps the author follows Magha, who too, chose to employ Yami in Canto VI of the Sisupalavadha. 
Besides, Magha's handling of Citrabandha in canto 19, has 
exerted great influence on the author, in elaborating some 
of the types of Citrabandha. 
CANTO VII 
Enraged at the abstention of the cowherds from 
offering worship due to him, Indra brought forth a heavy 
downpour of rains much to the discomfort of the cows and 
cowherds. However, Krsna lifted up the Govardhana hill and 
kept it upside down "un orting it by the finer offering 
a veritable shelter for one and all. Finding his effort 
28 
rendered futile, Indra came down and asked for Krepa's 
pon, admitting his defeat at the hands of the Lord, 
whom he praised as the Supreme Lord. Indra then performed 
the coronation of Krsna conferring upon Him the title of 
Covina. 
The author reveals his talents in Sabdacitra, while 
epicting the encounter between Krspa and Indra. 
CANTO VIII 
The spring season is then described with its effect 
en men and nature. Krapa is shown to draw the attention 
of Balarama to the enchanting beauties of the season. 
pa scized the opportunity for playing on the flute 
enrapturing the cattle and the cowherds. The cowherdesses 
who listened to this divine music gathered round Him with 
rnt attention. When they appe red to be a little proud, 
Krsna disappeared suddenly from their midst to test their 
nevotion to Him. The Gopik-zīta which is elaborately 
tr ted in the Bhagavata in the portrayal of the love of 
the cowl erdestes towards Krspa, is simply alluded to in three verses? here. Krop. took rity on their love-lorn 
condition, de His appe rance and begin the rasalila. 
After resting for a while, K. in'ulged in water sport 
with the cowlercesses. 's slaying a demon called 
Arista 28 -scribed here. 
29 
CANTO IX 
Disappointed greatly at the failure of his attempts 
to slay Krepa, Kamsa sent one of his officers, Akrūra to 
fetch Krapa to his court, making preparitions by several 
means for disposing him. Akrura who was aware of Krapa's 
rel nature and greatness, went forth to Gokula with all 
• 
thoughts of his good fortune to see the Lord ever attended on by Sridevi and Bhudevi 
- a reference to which is made 
here by the ruthor to show Akrura's awareness of Vispu's 
descent as Krspa. 
8 
In the meanwhile Kamsa directed one Kesin, a demon 
who came in the form of a horse to destroy Krspa only to 
meet his own end. The meeting of Akruri with Krapa and 
his trking Balerama and Krapa to Muthur are then described. 
The heart-rending grief of the cowherdesses at the departure 
of Krsun and Balarama from their midst is depicted with full 
pethos. They accuse Krspa of abandoning even Nila, Ridha 
And Palika all dear to the Lord, and question whether the n me will befit Akrurn who is only krura.9 The word Pidhuva 10 
used here suggests that Radha was one of the 
cowhertasses, not having hid the rank of the most beloved 
lady of Kyspa, as found in Brahmavaivartapurapa, Gīta Govinda 
and others, Akrūra's visions of Krypa both on the bank 
and in the waters of Yamuna are also mentioned, 
30 
CANTO X 
Krspa's entry into Mathura is described as attracting 
the eyes and the mind of the people there. A garland-seller 
and a hunch-backed woman had the good fortune of serving the 
divine brothers, in their respective capacities and received 
His blessings. As they entered the hall, Krypa saw the mighty bow resembling Pinaka of Siva's, and broke it easily. 
The fierce elephant Kuvalayapida, the two mighty wrestlers 
Capura and Mustika and Tosala confidant of Kamsa and 
finally Kamsa himself were all done to death. Krspa then 
bowed before his parents. Vasudeva praised Krypa which 
reveals that the author lays stress on Bhakti and Prapatti, 
11 
as the means to secure moksa. Krapa's two other arms 
which were withdrawn at the time of his birth now reappeared. 
Ogr senn, the father of Kamsa, was installed 
on the throne, 
while Krapa assumed the role of the crown prince. Krupa 
restored to his teacher Sandipani, his long lost child by 
way of gurudaksina. Krsna by his powers removed the curse 
pronounced by Yayiti and restored Yaduvamsa to its former 
13 glory. 
CANTO XI 
The death of Kansa brought an attack on the city of 
Mathura by Jarasandha, a friend of Kamsa. Knowing that 
Mathura was under a curse and the attack of Jarasandha would 
12 
31 
spell ruin to the city, Krsna desired to shift the 
capital to some other region which would be beyond 
the range of the attacks of Jarasandha and those 
associates of his, like Kalayavana. The new city of 
Dvaraka was constructed in the sea near the western 
coast with the help of the divine architect, Viśvakarman. 
Dvaraka is here described to be a marvellous piece of 
14 
creation of art indescribable even by the thousand- tongued Adisesa. 
Kropa had a palace for himself 
excelling the abode of Indra. Balarama alone proceeded 
to Gokula, for consoling the people who were distressed 
at the separation of Lord Krspa. Balarama sported in 
the Yamuna, drawing the river at his will. He married 
Revati, daughter of Revata at the advice of Brahma. 
CANTO XII 
Rukanipi is born as a daughter of King Bhisma of 
Vidarbha. Her youthful form receives a picturesque 
description, which recalls to our mind Kalidasa's 
depiction of the beauty of Parvati in Canto I of the 
waar samih va Her hand is sought after by Sifupila and her brother Rukminis working for it. 
llowever Rulanini has set her heart on Krypa and wants 
32 
to marry him. As a preliminary to the marriage, she 
cecked out in her bridal finery proceeds to the temple 
of Indrapi, and offers her worship to a deity which 
tlesses her by an assurance through an aerial voice 
that she would get, for her husband, one who would be 
unconquerable by anyone. The indications justifying 
tais are described which resemble those in the Sundara 
15 
Landa of the Ramayang. 
CANTO XIIT 
As Rukmini came out of the temple, Krsna made his 
appearance and taking her by the hand hastened to Dvaraka 
in a chariot. Rukmin's effort to prevent Krapa's abduction 
resulted in his defeat. 
Krspa's entry into Dvaraka is presented in a graphic 
ranner and the description of the women folk thronging 
to the windows of the houses for witnessing the proce- 
150 ssion of Krspa and Rukmini is wonderful. 
The marriage of Rukmini with Krspa is described in detail as a sacrament, as found in the works of Kalidasa. 
CANTO XIV 
This canto deals with the incidents relating to 
Krsna marrying Jambavati and Satyabhama. King Satrājit 
16 
33 
et from the Sun God a valuable gem, Syamantaka, It 
wis reported to be lost and Krsna had to trace it. 
This event led to two matrimonial alliances, the former 
the encounter between Krspa and Jambavan which 
eded in the defeat of Jambavan and his offering his 
daughter Jambavati to Krspa along with the Syamar.taka 
gem. The restoration of the gem to King Satrajit resulted 
in the marriage of his daughter Satyabhama with Krspa. 
Jambavan's prayer to Krşpa is highly philosophical 
where references are made to the Lord's descent as 
Vamana and Rama Jamoavan could not contain himself 
when he had to recall his happy association with Rama. 
CANTO XV 
Krsna was requested by Narada to do away with 
Sisupala, one of the supporters of the associates of 
Kamsa and always inimical to the eminence of Krapa. 
18 
17 
The stotra of Narada addressed co Krapa on his arrival 
at Dvaraka is philosophical, reflecting the spirit of 
the Upanisadio doctrines. 
It was at this time that King Yudhisthira was 
preparing for the Rajasuya sacrifice, Lord Krsna was 
invited to attend and this gave an opportunity for Lord 
34 
to display his gausilva and his paratva. It was argued 
by Sahadeva that the principal honour (agramila) should be offered to Krspa. On hearing this, Sisupala flared up and 
spoke derisively of Krspa. This was followed by the advice 
of Bhigma. However, the arguments of the aged Bhisma in 
the assemblage of the princes in favour of the need to give prominence to Kɲspa, had no effect on Sisupala. His repudiation of Krapa's greatness drew Sisupala into an open fight with Kɲspa resulting in the death of Sisupala, 
and a blaze from his body entered Krspa. 
CANTO XVI 
The invaluable and divine ear-rings of Aditi were 
stolen away by Narakasura a powerful demon. Indra found 
it difficult to restore them to Aditi and hence approached 
Krspa at Dvaraka for help praising the Lord making reference 
to his previous descent as Nrsimha and Varaha. The palace 
of Lord Krsna gets a brief description here. 
At the request of Indra, Krspa flew to Prakjyotiga. 
the city of Narakasura riding on Garuda along with 
Satyabhama. Krspa destroyed Narakasura and released 
16000 damsels kept as captives by Narakasura. At the 
instance of the Goddess Earth, Mother of Narakasura, 
19 the day of his death became a day of festivity.' 
35 
CANTO XVII 
Taking the ear-rings of Aditi, Krepa along with 
Garuda and Satyabhama proceeded to the capital of Indra 
and was honoured by the Gods, Krapa showed to Satyabhama 
the beautiful Nandanavara in that celestial city. This 
wonderful garden was ever the envy of all the onlookers 
because of the presence of the Parliata tree. Directed 
by Krsna, Garuda removed the tree and hid it in the bosom 
of his wings. Overpowered by rage, Indra obstructed and 
began to fight with Garuda and Krsna. In despair, Indra 
seized his yaira to attack the Lord, but was overpowered 
and defeated. 
The canto ends with Indra offering praises to Krapa. 
The essential truths of the Ramanuja system gets a poetic 
description in this canto. 
CANTO XVIII 
The victorious return of Krspa with the pariiata 
tree gets a detailed description from Krspa himself to 
Satyabhama. The regions that are in the atmosphere above 
the earth like Mountain Meru, Mount Kailas, the city of 
Bapa, the Himalayas, the Ganges, Badrikāśrama, Kurukşetra, 
the river Yamuna, the city of Mathura and the western shores 
36 
and the ocean, the city of Dvaraka are all described 
in this aerial flight. 
On his return Krapa was informed by Narada of 
Aniruddha the grandson of Krapa kept as captive by 
Banasura, and Krsna retired to bed after instructing the army to be ready the morrow. 
CANTO XIX 
The entire canto can be described as a suprabhata 
stotra intended to wake up the Lord from his slumber. 
The minstrels sing the glory of God by depicting 
the external atmosphere. The human world, the 
the 
birds, the setting in of the moon followed by dawn and 
appearance of the beaming rays of the sun, the 
lowing of the conches all these are described preserving 
the sequential order in which these occur. 
In a way, 
the author has based this description along the lines of 
Kalidasa, in connection with the waking up of King Aja 
by the minstrels when he was camping in the city of 
20 
Vidarbha. The description of dwn by Bana in his 
kr2 just before the arrival of the hunters near 
the silk cotton tree seems to have exerted some influence 
on the author. 
37The Lord woke up, finished his morning ablutions 
and took his seat on the royal throne. 
CANTO XX 
With a vast army Krspa marched against Bapasura, 
who had imprisoned Aniruddha whom Usa the daughter of 
Bana wanted to marry. The fight was a terrible one. Jord Siva whom Bapa propitiated as his chosen deity 
came in to protect his devotee. But he himself was 
subdued. Kropa then cut off the extra hands of Bapa, but saved his life at the intervention of Siva who 
praised the Lord. Bapa was allowed to continue to erve Siva. Krspa returned to Dvarakā along with 
şa and Aniruddha, 
CANTO XXX 
A person called Paupdraka Vasudeva was jealous 
of Krspa's eminence and proclaimed himself as the real 
Vasudeva by wearing similar weapons like the conch and 
the discus. He sent word through a messenger to Krepa 
demanding Krapa's handing over his own conch and discus. 
Kyspa fought with him and destroyed him along with his 
associate 
Kasiruja. 
As the son of the King of Kasi 
38 
retaliated by sending a Krtiz, Krypa destroyed not only the Krtiza, but also the entire city of Kaśi by directing 
his discus. 
Dvivida an aged monkey who was an ally of Rama, in 
the previous avatara, proved to be a menace to the people 
and Balarama had to destroy him. 
CANTO XXII 
Now that all the powerful adversaries had been 
destroyed or overcome, it was felt that a victorious march 
(jaitrayatra) by way of digviiave was necessary for going 
round the land offering protection to the good and destroying evil forces. So Krspa assembled all his men and advised 
them to march though the entire country under the leadership 
of Satyaki, exerting the sovereignty of Krapa over the 
ruling princes in the various parts of the land. 
Modelled upon Raghu's digviiava described in the 
Raghuvansa canto IV, the poet takes us through the marches 
of the army covering several regions. Proceeding towards 
the Madhyadesa and North west, Satyaki encountered the 
Yavanas, the Barbaras, the Hupas, the Kambojas and subdued 
39 
them all. Satyaki then proceeded to Kashmir, the Himalayas, 
Nepal and to Bengal in the east. From there he directed 
his march towards the south. Passing through Utkal, 
conquering the Kalingas who opposed him, he entered the Godavari and the Andhra region where people welcomed him. He then proceeded through Tupdiramandala to Coladeśa. 
Crossing the Cauvery, Satyaki went further south towards 
Lanka where he seems to have seen four-tusked elephants. 
N 
22 
After defeating the Sinhala ruler, he proceeded 
with his army through the Pandya region where he was 
welcomed. From there he went along Kerala, Gokarpa, Sutiva 
Konkana, Maharastra. After crossing the river Reva, they 
saw the ruined cities of Mahismati of Kartavirya, and the 
city of Nisada. Satyaki then returned to Dvaraka and was 
applauded for his victorious return. (The Lord had advised 
Satyaki to leave the Kauvaras and Papavas, evidently for 
the Great War). 
CANTO XXIII 
The story of Mihabharata receives a brief but good 
description where attention is drawn to what is outstanding 
in the life of the Pandavs, and their close association 
with Kyna. 
40 
Krypa's mission as a messenger for a truce resulted, 
through its failure, in the break out of the great war 
between the Pandavas and the Kauvaras despite the fact 
that Krapa revealed His Lordship. Kripa took the role 
of the charioteer of Arjuna. As Arjuna, owing to his 
misplaced compassion, became despondent and also diffident 
in fighting his own kinsmen, Krena had to advise Arjuna by 
encouraging him with his valuable preachings inducing him 
tɔ fight.. All but the Yadavas lay dead. Krepa saved by 
the touch of his feet, the almost dead Pariksit, the son of Abhimanyu. Draupadi was now in a position to have her braid, 
which was let loose during the game of dice, tied by the 
23 
Pappavas, at the instance of Krepa, an incident mentioned from the Venisamhara of Bhattanarayapa and not traceable 
to other sources. 
Bhisma, who was lying in his bed of arrows awaiting 
Uttarayapa, was approached by Krspa and the Pandavas, for 
advising them on Dharma. Krapa returned to Dvaraka after 
installing Yudhisthira on the throne. 
CANTO XXIV 
The life led by Krepa in the company of his consorts 
gets a detailed description of which Narada had a clear 
41 
a1 
preciation. 
Krspa stood steadfast in Dharma leiding 
1 exemplary life. He displayed a love that did not 
1 in counter to Dharma. 
42 
43 
NOTES 
1. Cf: Sudaksipa's state of pregnancy described 
2. 
in the Raghuvamsa, III. 2-9. 
The prayers of the deva's in Canto I (16-37) and 
that of Vasudeva in Canto Ill are at once reminiscent of the prayers offered to Vispu, in Canto X of the Raghuvansa (16-32) and to Brahm, in Canto T (4-15) of the Kum sarbhav, cortraying the coctrines of Vaisnavicm, 
See YA. TIT. 15-16; 15-22 
3. The Yoins chose to meditate upon this 118, 
Vide: YA, IV.101 
4. Sec Tirup val, Andalura, 18. It may be noted 
5. 
6. 
• 
+2 
tret 4 - necent is referred to in the Harivamsa 
as well 
Vire com ry on YA, TV.98. 
YA. V. fit. 
(4. 
Phyta, Y. 1. 
Y£. 
7. YA. VI. 74-76 
11. 
Ibid. X. 74-75, 
12. 
Ibid. X. 88 
13. 
Ibid. X. 93 
14. 
Ibid. XI. 75. 
15. 
Sundarakanda. 29; and A. XII. 93 
15a. Kumarasambhava VII.56-66; Raghuvansa VII. 5-15 
16. 
Kumarasambhava VII. 72-83; Raghuvamsa VII. 18-29. 
YA, XIV. 31-33 
17. 
18. 
Ibid. XV. 11-12. 
19. 
Ibid. XVI. 145. 
20. 
21. 
233 
22. 
Raghuvamsa, V. 65-74; YA. XIX.2. 
Kadambari pp. 78-81 
YA. XXII. 190 
23. Tbid. XXIII. 56. 
44 
CHAPTER III 
YADAVABHYUDAYA A STUDY 
OF ITS SOURCES 
YĀDA ĀBHYUDAYA 
A STUDY OF ITS SOURCES 
45 
Krypa's life is dealt with in the Mahabharata Harivania? Vistapurapa? Bhagavata 
2 
6 
Padma parang," 
Brahmavaivartapurana and Brahmandapuraba. Among 
these the Mahabharatx version contains the narration 
by Bhiqma in Sabha parva, by Vidura in Udyogaparva, 
and Digtarastra in Dronaparva. In the first mentioned 
parva, almost all the incidents which had occurred in 
Krapa's life are described in detail. Chapter 130 in 
Udyogaparva and chapter 11 in Dronaparva give a more ' 
enumeration of the incidents. Harivansa gives a 
description in detail. Since Harivansa is a supplement 
to the Mahabharata, it is not incorrect to take them 
together. In the Mahabharata it is stated that Kгspa 
did not either enter inte the womb of Devaki nor stay 
there. He could do what ever He wishes through His 
power.8 
own lustrous pover. 
A comparison between the treatment of the events 
in the epic and in the Harivansa shows that the superhumaR.JE 
element is not so much pronounced in the epic. It is 
developed in the Hariva. Here the erotic element is 
evident in the description of Hallisa dance in which Krspa indulged with the cowherdesses.9 
11 
10 
The Vispupurapa account is almost like what is 
found in Harivansa. The word Rasalila occurs here. 
Both superhuman and erotic elements are pronounced 
in the Bhagavata. The Padmapurana, Brahmavaivartapurana 
and the Brahmandapurapa contain an almost similar version 
with the difference that the erotic element is uppermost 
in the Brahmavaivarta, and the Brahmandapurana describes 
only one incident in Krspa's life. Thus the study of the 
sources could be confined to the Virpupurapa and 
Bnaravuta and also Harivamsa, since these contain the 
narration and incidents in almost the same sequential 
order. The Mahabharata can be left out of consideration 
as this order of the incidents is not maintained there. 
The Vispupurana gives the description of the 
events in the same order with certain differences. 
Syamantaka incident and Sisupala's death are not given 
in the fifth amsa. They are found in amsa IV while describing the Yadu's rice.12 
Further the Mahabharata 
was is not contained in this purine. 
46The Bhagavata narration follows the Vispupurana order but treats Sisupalavadha after Paup rakavasudeva's 
killing. Here too the Mahabharata war is left out. 
The Harivamsa treatment is in the same order but omits 
the slaying of Sisupala and Paup rakavasudeva and does 
not also describe the Mahabharata war. The Syamantaka 
incident is given in the first parva, 38th chapter. 
Padmapurana does not also treat the Mahabharata war but treats Sisupalavadha at the end. In these, the war 
is merely hinted at. 
The Yadavabhyudaya treats these incidents in 
almost the same order as in the Vispupurana, taking Syamantaka episode and Sisupalavadha after Rukmini's 
marriage to be followed by Narakasuravadha. It is to be 
noted that it is only at the hands of the author that Sisupalavadha precedes Narakasur vadha. The author has 
effected certain changes in the description of the main 
incidents in Kispa's life with a motive and has left 
out certain incidents, but id not deviate from the 
sources nor bring into the narration any new occurence 
that is not to be traced to the sorces, because the 
47 
48 
author's objective in writing this poem was to give 
a religious background for the treatment of the 
incidents. 
It would be enough if references are given here 
to certain occurences in Krspa's life where no deviation 
13 worth the name is noticed. For instance, the curse 
pronounced by Yayiti on his son Yadu is not stated but 
how Krspa retrieved this family from it and made it 
14 
glorious, is described by the author. Likewise, shifting 
of the family from Gokula to Brndavana is alluded to in 
the poem. 
15 
Kanyavrata and the songs of the Gopikas are 
briefly referred to without much detail as they are 
found in Bhagavata,16 as the author did not attach 
any special significance for them. 
Among the changes which the author had effected 
with details concerning the occurrences, mention must 
be made of the sources of the family of the Yadavas. 
The Vispupurana and the Bhagavata refer to the sage 
•17 Atri's eye as the source for the lunar race The 
author makes the eye of Vispu 
18 
as the source of the moon 
following the Furugasūkta.19 The commentator seeks to 
reconcile the author's treatment which goes against the 
statement of the soures, as referr.. o the narrations 
gren by different sages in different kilpas and cites 
th VarivIyanup to support the author's description.20 
The Govardhana hill is described in the source 
21 
bo ks that Kropa lifted it up with the hand. The 
ruthor however writes that Krspa lifted up the hill and 
held it on the tip of the finger. This is intended to 
show that Kyrp's might was such that even His finger was 
strong enough to bear the Hill. 
Tr's effort to cause havoc to the cownerdesses 
6- ouring torrent inlins in the Hil was frustrated. 
Fe ruled his insignificance before Koopa, bered His 
resion in' himself contacted en ablution to Krape x.V113 
him the lovinda, inte's wroup from Gin I i 
n te 
in the 1. of Air.... 
.t 
ouates tt tre 
main of the divine cow we were along with the 
Pub 
Wevers of Gal Ae AK OF 
Bt. Les b. & divi. Cry 
V 
elint. 
24 
¿ 
d. 
he ut or follows 
49 
the Vismipurna account. 
23 
Rukmini is said to have worshipped on the eve of her marriage in the Devisadana, evidently the temple 
24 
o Devi. But there is no reference to this in the Lusunuring. The author mentions that Rukmini visited the temple of Indrapi.25 Sloka 91 in Canto XII of the poem mentions the deity worshipped by Rukmini as Utsava- devata. The commentator identifies this deity as Indrapi 
Certain incidents that have gained treatment in 
source books are left out by the author. For instance: 
1. Kucela's visit to Krspa is found on the Padmapurana and 
27 
Bhagavata; but not in Vispupurana and Harivansa. 
This indicates that the author has preference to 
pupura for his source. 
2. A curse is said to have been pronounced upon Vasudeva 
28 
in his previous birth; but it is left unnotic by 
the author. This wis 
This was evidently to avoid referring 
to a blot in the beh viour of Vasudeva, who is indic ted to deserve becoming the father of Krapa. 
3. The fight and the suosenunt defeat and de th of Jarasanina at the her's of Bhimsena and Krapa's 
50 
■lying Kalayavona are not treated except for a stray 
reference either because they do not have much rele- 
vare in the context or do not have mrh significance 
in the story of Krspa. 
4. Kikewise, Krepa's eating mud which is referred to 
29 
in the Bhagvata, is ignored by the author for the 
reason that it has much significance only to depict 
Kropa's sports when he was a child. Besides, this 
would require a more detailed narration of the 
incidents connected with this torether with the 
effect on Yasoda and others. 
Though the author chose to follow the Vispupurapa 
account for the narration of events, he has chosen also 
the HARAvata to devict certain incidents. For instance, 
31 
K.'s receiving the fruits from the fruit-seller, is 
described. Ky,pa's sinvin; the se bulls to win the 
31 while in the 
h of wil is dened by tn nuthor, 
Barney this invivent to C 
A 
' 
❤ 
ce to the think of 
1r and by the author 
Per the 1fluencer 100 recorded in tre 
bring 
Aelivers comuus. 
to verunt, adna is 
51 
34 referred to only once, along with one Palika. However 
Radhi, who is not mentioned in Vispupurapa and Bhagavata 
gets a glorious description in Brahmavaivirtapurapa which 
of ourse, the author did not choose to follow. 
The author omitted some more minor incidents 
Like Upanayana of Krspa and Balarama, 
36 
35 
Waming of the 
Was 37 
hil Krspa by Gargacarya rescue of Ninda who was 
7 
arried away in the waters of the Yamuna. 
38 
The author has introduced certain lengthy descriptions" 
Like the seasons, Rukmini's growth, her marriage, the 
instrels waking Krspa, Satyaki's digvijaya and Krspa's 
fe as an ideal house-holder, Syam ntaka episode, 
are 
palavadha, Narakisuravidha, Parijatapurapa, 
arayuddha and Poundrak vasuva's death. Among 
nature description (seasons) could be considered 
aring the influence of the Bhagvata. Other 
riptions find room here to justify the poem to 
30 
irve the title 
Luence of ". 
'W' i en under the 
Migha. 
ription of Deviki's po money (C to II) is 
idently model ed u on t t of undaksipi in Highuvamsa 
Kunto III). Sim tur.v, the descrition of the marriage 
52 
(Cento XIII), Satyaki's digvijaya (Canto XXII), 
description of land as seen from above seated on the 
back of Garuda (Canto XVIII) are all modelled upon 
a similar scene in Kumarasambhava and Raghuvamsa. 
40 
It is thus seen that the author wis primarily 
indebted to the Vispupur apa and then to Bhagavata 
for the treatment of the fe of Krspa. He has 
followed poets like Kalidasa nd Magha for the poetic 
description of the events. It may be said that he cl 
to follow Magha in devoting one canto for each incident 
although he did not actually make use of Migha's 
expressions except in the use of Sabdalankara. 
53 
NOTES 
1. Mahabharata, Sabhaparva, Udyogaparva and Dropaparva. 
Brief reference are available in other parvas liks 
Arturasana, Stri and others. 
2. Harivansa, a whole section called Vispupurapa 
(123 chapters) is devoted to describe Krspa's life. 
3. See AmER V, in 38 chapters (istupurana) 
Skandha X. 90 chapters and Skandha XI. 31 chapters. 
5. Uttarakhanda, Chapters 272-279. (Padmapurana) 
6. Prahmava vartaruriņa, Purvardha chapters 5 to 129 
Venkateswaramuralaya Edition, Bombay. 
7. Erikminarurapa, Upod ghatapada, chapter 71 
8. Naiga garbatvamarede na yonyam avasat prabhup 
almunastejasā ka sarvegamsurute gatim. 
Mahabharata II Appendix I (21) lines 1607 to 1608, 
Finarlar Oriental Institute edition, Poona. 
This is a kind of dance in which a man takes part 
with women. The erotic element is not prominent 
in the Parivare, Cl. pter 63 
0. Y, V. 13-23. 
54 
11. See under 7 
12. Samantaka in IV. 13, 64 to 98; Sisupalavadha in 
IV. 14, 45-52 of Vixunuraba. 
13. Vispururana, IV. 10. 12. 
14. XA. X. 93, 118, 119. 
15. Tod. IV. 39 & 40; Vispupurana V. 6. 21-28; 
Phacovata. X. 11, 27-35. 
16. Ibid. IV. 46 to 49. Bhagavata. X. 22. 1-28. 
17. Vispururapa, IV. v1.6; Bhagavata, IX. xiv.3. 
18. A. I. 10. 
19. Reveda, X. 90. 
20. See commentary on YA. I. 10. 
21. 11. umrkDA, V.11.16; Bhagavata X.25.19; 
Harivanst. Adh. 61. 1. 30, 58. YA.VII.74 
22. Ysgururana, V. xii.13; Ehagavata X. xxvii. 22 & 23 
and Farivan's. Adh. 62. Śls. 58-60 
23. XA. VII. 103. 
24. Bhagavata X. 53–44. 
25. YA. XII. 91. 
26. See commentery on YA. XII. 91. 
27. Bhadevata. X. 80 and 811 Padaspurana. 279 $1. 30-36 
55 
28. Zarivania, Vilmparva 45. 20-36. 
29. Bhagavata. X. viii. 32-43 
30. A. IV. 30 to 32; Bhagavata X. xi. 10 and 11 
31. A. IV. 98 
32. Bhagavata X. 58. 32. 47 
33. Tirumozhisai alvar Tiruccandavirutam. V. 41 
Sundarabhahu stavam of Kurathazhvan 81. 187. 
XA, 98. 
34. XA. IX. 90; Periyalvar Tirumozhi. 3-1-6. 
35. Vispururāna, V. 21. 19; Bhagavata. X, 45.29 
36. Ehrenvata. X. viii. 13 and 14 
37. bid. X. 28 etc 
38. Seasons Yaduvabhyudaya Canto ▼ and VIII 
Rulsipi's prowth 
Her Karraire 
XII 
XIII 
Minstrels awakening Krypa XIX 
Satynki's digvijaya 
XXII 
Ka's life as an ideal 
bouse-holder 
XAN 
Syamurtala episode 
XIV 
Surved 
XV 
KerakFour-vedra 
XVI 
Par: Jatajataraga 
XVII 
x 
Baparure yucca 
Fauggarakavāsudeva's 
CELTA 
XI 
56CHAPTER 
YADAVĀBHYUDAYA 
IV 
A MAHĀKĀVIA 
TADATABHYUDAYA A.MAHĀKĀVYA 
This is a Mahakava which was written satisfying 
all the main characteristic features laid down by the 
rhetoricians. The author's aim does not consist in 
merely depicting the life of Krsna in the form of 
a Mahakavya; his ambition is to describe the incidents 
in the life of Lord Krsna, from a philosophical point 
of view, in order that the kava can also be treated 
as bringing out Krspa's divinity and the purpose of 
his divine descent. 
According to Dapdin, a Mahakavva or Sargabandh 
is formed with the divisions called sargas. It must 
begin with a benediction or salutation to a deity or 
with a direct reference to a theme. It may be based 
on a past event taken from an Itihasa or a tale (katha). 
The theme shall be a good one, providing room for 
acquiring the four-fold ends of life, namely dharma, 
artha, kama and moksa. The hero shall be a great 
person, resolute, full of wisdom and nobility. 
58 
The items that are generally described in a kavya 
are - city, ocean, mountains, seasons, moon-rise, 
sun-rise, enjoyment of pleasures, expression of leve 
in separation, marriage, birth of a son, counsels, 
sending messages, march against the enemy, battles, 
prosperous rise of the hero, and others. 
The kavya shall not be a condensed one or very 
elaborate in regard to treatment. There shall be 
provision for the expression of emotions and sentiments. 
The cantos shall not be too lengthy and must be 
composed in different metres possessing well-defined 
junctures. The last or the last few verses shall be 
in a metre different from that of the other lokas in 
a canto. It shall be pleasing to the listeners. 
A kavya shall be embellished with figures of 
speech. Such a kava will endure for ever. However, 
absence of a few of these items will not bring discredit to the kavya.1 
59 
Bham ha presents the features of a Mahakavva 
in his Kalankara almost on the above lines. 
The noteworthy features according to him are that 
the word and ideas should be free from vulgarity. 
The mean ng should 
clear and easy of understanding. 
ion for presenting happy situations 
It shoul have prov 
The second pursuit in 
life, namely, artha should 
receive greater attention than the other purusart ha-3. 
The worldly practices should be pictured there. 
2 
In the Sahityadarpana, 3 Viśvanatha too gives the 
definition of a Mahakavva. According to him, the hero 
shall be a Goda Ksatriya of good family with the 
attainments of a Dhirodatta. Kings born of the same 
family or many persons of noble descent could be the 
heroes. The main rasa may be srngara or vira or santa. 
All other rasas may be subsidiary. In some cases, 
it can present wicked people in their true colours. 
It can extol the qualities of the good. The cantos 
shall not be very few nor can they be too lengthy. 
They should be more than eight in number. 
Certain 
60 
· 
cantos may have verses composed in different metres. 
The last verse in a canto shall indicate the contents 
of the succeeding canto. Twilight, nightfall, darkness, 
dawn, noon, hunting and others may get described in 
retail. It can also include the treatment of s"ges, 
heaven, sacrifices and others. These should be treated 
in detail according to the context. The name of the 
roet or the conduct of the hero or of some other 
characters or the contents of the c nto could also be 
iven. 
The Yadav bhyudaya possesses most of the traits 
of a Mah k vy which the rhetoricans have stated in 
their works. The kiva opens with a salut tion to 
Lord Krenn. 
The theme which deals with the rise 
of the son of Vasudeva is based on nest events, as are 
nar ed in the Vispururina, Haravamsa and narred 
Bhagavata 
The author has also taken some material from the 
Brahm v vort rurina and the Padmapur pa. The story 
of Krona had been chosen by the author and so he had 
no difficulty in errating events in the life of Krypa. 
The thers of the levyn 1 mentioned in the last 
ver of luck wa 
na 
in his commenry. 
mounted out by Anpayya Dikşita 
61 
- 
kavyasyot kargab kathamithi cet prabandhagauravepa nayakaṬauravepa sabdarthacamatkara 
kathasandarbha- 
saubhagyakathasatyatvarupe pa svatab prabandhagauravepa 
ca tadutkarsa iti. bhagavade kanisthatvalakşapam kaveḥ 
gauravam. yaduvírasya nayakatvaprakatanena nayagauravam. 
surabhitarasam – anena rasa pradhanata arthacamatkārap 
taducitavarpadisanghatana, sabdacamat karasceti tadubhaya- pauṣkalyan arsitam sungtam śrotrpan priyan satyan 
1 
62 
cetyarthap. phalam kşemadam abhyudayanibs re yasarupamangalam. 
The poem which is also a Sastra kavva in the sense that 
it is written in the back round of the philosophical leanings 
of the author, gives prominence to moksa, the fourth pursuit 
in life and the means to attain it. The author observes at 
the end that the kivya was written for the pleasure of the 
Lord. It is ksemada which according to the commentator Dikşita, is giving prosperity and liberation (abhyudaya 
and nibsreyasa). Dīksita says it is the dawn of prosperity 
of moksa. 
The author does not make specific provision for 
developing the nature of the pursuits of the trivarga, namely dharma, artha and kama. In fact, these three are all given 
by God, and what one has got as trivarga is to be well- 
protected and for this purpose, God's grace is essential. 
The hero, Krapa is dhirodatta 
of enormous 
potentialities, majestic, noble-minded, personification 
of sympathy, free from conceit, clever and courageous. 
vira, a poble descendant of the race of Yadu. 
CITY: 
Cons stent with the gen al requisits a kaya 
demands, the poem presents a glorious description of 
the city of Dvarka built by Viswakarman at the instance 
54 
of Lord Krapa. It was built in the sea on the western 
coast, so that it would lie beyond the attacks of the 
enemies. The city consisted of ramparts which vere 
6 
lashed by the waves of the sea. People lived a happy life free from all kinds of calamities.? 
There is again the description of Dvaraka as 
from an aerial view when Krapa returns along with 
Satyabhama riding on Garuga after taking the Parijata 
tree from the garden of Indra. 
8 
Magha in his Sisupalavacha presents a glorious 
description of Dvaraka. The ramparts are described 
to be very lofty and when the high waves lashed against 
them the waves could not rise to the height of the 
10 
rampart walls and so fell down as if in shame. 
63 
Desika says that there were tall towers in various 
directions having wonderful images bearing resemblance 
to the Lord himself, suggesting, as it were, the omni- 
presence of God, as in his Visvaruna. 
There were, 
11 
here itself, riches of several kinds that remained, 
without undergoing any change, which removed from the 
minds of persons the desire to perform penance for going 
12 
to svarga for enjoying these. The white appearance of 
the various mansions along with their opulence seems to 
laugh, as it were, at the riches of the city of Kubera 
and of Indra. 
13 
Though the author depicts the city and the life 
of the people along the lines found in the writings of 
Kalidasa and Magha, certain pictures like those of the 
pleasure-seeking youths, as found in the writings of these 
poets are avoided here. 
14 
The description of the city of Dwaraka at the 
hands of the author shows the author's display of poetic 
fancy as is found in the description of the same city at 
the hands of Magha. 
Describing the mighty tall towers of the city, 
Desika says, 
that the pearl-like water drops thrown 
up by the waves presented the appearance of stars even 
64 
during day time.15 
According to Magha the heaps of the 
precious jewels covered by drops of water spread on the 
turrets by the hand-like waves of the sen, lay covered by 
the foam, to be dried up by the sun. 
16 
fri besika says that the stars in the sky felt 
· 
ashamed nd came down seeing the brillner of tie ne rl 
strings or by the beutiful ladies sented in the turrets 
of the city.17 Magha observes tunt the exuisite beauty 
of the lotus-faced Indies excelled the moon, which seemed 
to have come down humiliated, even without the ladies 
ascending the spires of the toers tit rose hove the 
18 
nath of the stars. 
In another plce while deserthing the city of Dvaraka 
from an aerial view, Krspa se ted on the back of Gruda 
along with Saty: bham describes the building in the city 
as going up to the heavens and their shadows moving down 
to the nether re ions, and it is then r ther difficult to 
find out where the in entrance lay.19 Migla describing 
the skull in architecture of Viśv korn says, that the 
city looked if it were reflection of her ven in the 
༡༩། 
w.ters of the on n. 
65 
The city appeared to be superior to Vaikuntha as the Lord of Vaikuntha Himself was the Lord of Dvaraka.21 
The city was superior to the three abodes of the Lord 
Vaikuntha, karabdhi, the centre of the sun for those meditating on the Lord." 
22 
Dvaraka was so holy as Vaikuntha that all other 
places on earth paled into insignificance. 
OCEAN: 
23 
The ocean receives a detailed description in Canto XVIII 
where Krsna describes it to Satyabhama as he returns from 
the land of Indra. This description is similar to the one 
presented by Rama to Sita on his return from Lanka in the 
24 
aerial car. In both these contexts it is the hero that 
describes the sea to his beloved. Magha gives a similar 
description of the sea. 
25 
The close impact of the waves on the resplendent 
corals with the pearls showered on them recalls to mind, 
the offering of fried grains in the glowing sacrificial 
fire at the time of Krepa's marriage with Satyabhama. 
26 
It may be noted here that the marriage of the Lord with 
Satyabhama must have bern celebrated with all the observances 
and rituals associated with the marriage of Rukmini. 
66The ocean tossed and churned severely by the winds, 
hurls up the heaps of conches. This appeared as if the sea 
was again ejecting forth the nectar white in complexion like the conches.27 
Kalidasa in his Raghuvamsa speaks of the rows of 
conches being thrown up by the winds and it appears as 
if the sea is being churned by the mountain." Magha 
28 
speaks of the rows of pearls thrown out by the sea on the 
shores of the ocean appearing like the rays of the moon thrown out.29 
The author refers to nectar, Goddess Laksmi, the 
moon, Airavata, and other things obtained during the 
churning of the ocean and which were taken by the Gods. 
The sea is said to have acquired a unique reputation by 
bringing forth Laksmi who was offered to Lord Vigpu as 
his spouse along with the gem Kaustubha. 
30 
The ocean itself, the abode of precious things, 
Ratnakara, appeared to wear on its breast the city of 
Dvaraka built of precious gems, like a garland of gems. 
31 
Magha, on the other hand, speaks of the ocean heaping 
around the shores of Dvaraka, its precious jewels, as if a 
father presenting a necklace of jewels to his daughter. 
32 
67 
MOUNTAINS: 
The Govardhana hill is described in detail.33 
The author seems to have been influenced by Magha who 
depicts the Raivata Hi1134 in different metres. The 
author describes the Goverdhana hill employing a very large variety of Sabdalankara and Citmbandha. 
There is also a description of the Himalayas both 
from an aerial view on Krspa's return from the city of 
35 
36 Indra, 
and during Satyaki's Dirvilava. 
The oceanion for describing the Govardhana hili is 
in connection with the festival of Indra, which the 
cowherds used to conduct annually. This has been described 
long with the setting in of the season in Cantos V to VII. 
While describing the hill, the author reveals the influence of Sisupalavadha (conto VI) where the Raivata hill gets 
described with the onset of the seasons. Magha employs 
Yamaka in some slokas while the author exhibits his skill 
in employing the variety of forms of Yamaka and Citrabandha, 
The hill is eminent as good people had glorified it. 
It is superior to the Himalayas, 
37 
evidently because 
of Krena's stay there. 
38 
68 
This hill is resorted to by pious souls of unexcelled 
knowledge for performing Yoga. Persons who are lost in 
Samadhi and aspiring for permanent bliss as well as those 
who observe fasting and prayer resort to the Govardhana hill 
along with their wives. Those who study the Vedas, the house-holders, and the recluses reside there.39 Lovers 
in separation find their permanent reunion brought about, 
by approaching this hill. 
40 
The hill rouses in the minds of persons a desire 
to stay in the hills, by the shining appearance of the 
charming crickets (Jhilli), by being a place of security 
by the precious stones abounding in its slope and by 
41 attractive trees. 
Krsna draws the attention of Balrama to the beauty 
of the hill by the provision it makes for pleasure, by 
the dance of the waves of the rivers, by the sound 
produced by the fall of the river from the high cliff 
and by the humming music of the bees. 
42 
While describing to Satyabhama the earth as seen 
from the air, Krsna describes the Meru Mountain. The 
69 
luminaries like the sun are said to revolve round this 
mountain giving the impression, that a waving of lights- (nīrajana) is performed to the hill at the command of God.43 
During is victorious march, Satyaki happens to move 
along the Himalayan ranges which looked like a group of 
mountains, as the (Visvarupa) of Lord Viguu and as a pillar 
444 of support to the heavens. 
SEASONS: 
Summer, winter, autumn, spring and hemanta receive 
a vivid desc intion at the hands of the author. Summar 
is described in Canto V, spring in canto VIII, and 
hemanta in canto VII. The author states that the seasons 
served Krsna in their due order. 
45 
nitantadhanyaḥ sagupairabhuvannirvisyamana 
rtavah kramena 
(YA.V.3) 
It was a pleasant season when the trees were not 
affected by severe winds, nor did water dry up by the 
sun. The forest region was not consured by fire. All 
46 this was pecuse of Kropa's presence. 
The cowreressos slept beneath the shade of the 
trees, relieved of the sun's heat during the day. They 
70 
took their refreshing bath in the evening and wore patala 
47 flowers and enjoyed the nights in the company of lovers. 
The torrential rains made as it were a coronation 
for the hills which enjoyed then, the waving of the lights 
48 
as the streak of lightning flashed forth near them. 
The sky was filled with clouds where lightnings flashed, 
presenting the dances as it were, the rumbling sound of the 
clouds seemed as though they were resonant sounds of the 
drum. This was therefore a stage, for the actor namely, 
Cupid with his wife Rati. Thus the sky seemed to present 
49 the nine sentiments. 
Rains ceased. The lotus plants stood above the 
water in the tanks with their reflection formed in the 
water below. The author fancies that these two appear 
like the two measurements of space above and below which 
the Lord made by his steps in his descent as Vamana.50 
The Spring season set in. The Lord who is unaffected 
by changes derived enjoyment in the company of the cowherd- 
esses. The atmosphere was such as was useful and attractive 
to lovers. 
The Campaka buds pointed and red as they were just 
emerging, looked like the flame of lamps lit by the 
season for the celebration of a festival of Cupid. 
51 
71 
The breeze from the south was making the trees 
with flowers move to, and fro. This appeared as though 
the spring season created them to serve as arrows and 
52 counting them so as to be assured of their number. 
Five seasons out of six have been taken up for description leaving sisira. While Kalidasa preferred 
to depict the Spring season alone, with its effects 
53 
54 
on people, animals and birds, Bharavi has mentioned 
all the seasons except Sisira. 
Magha describes all the six seasons in Canto VI. 
Vasanta in 
verses 2 to 21 
Grişma in 
verses 22 to 24 
Varşa in 
verses 25 to 40 
• 
Sarat in 
verses 41 to 54 
Hemanta in 
verses 55 to 61 and 
Sisira in verses 62 to 66 
These are again described with the use of Yamaka. 
Vasanta in 
verses 67 to 70 
Grişma in 
verse 71 
Varşa in 
verses 72, 73 
Sarat in 
verses 74 to 76 
Hemanta in verse 77 and 
Sisira in verse 78 
Description of the Sun and the Moon: 
The setting of the Sun and the rising of the moon 
.are described in Canto II. 37 to 48 and 50 to 92. The 
rising of the moon at the time of the birth of Krspa is 
described vividly by the author. The gradual and 
succeeding phenomena in nature are indicated by the loss 
of brightness in the last, setting in of darkness, gradual 
rise of the moonlight and the rise of the half-moon. 
Darkness enveloped the entire atmosphere which did not 
reveal where the hills lay. As the moon beams gradually 
spread over them, it seemed as if the hills were lifted 
55 up by the rays of the moon. 
The form of the moon at its rise, bore the dark 
patch resembling the eyes of the moon, the red hue of 
the moon looked like the ornamental mark made on the 
face of the woman of night, prepared out of Kasturi 
56 and Kunkumam. 
Sunset is described on the day of Krsna's birth 
resembling another form of Krspa. The twilight which 
was of the golden colour resembled Vigpu's form dressed 
in reddish yellow, cloth. It concealed the entire effuld 
gence of the sun. So it possessed those features which 
57 Vispu had and was therefore adored by the people. 
The sun's disc appeared like the red gem on the 
It is fancied that the serpent got 
hood of a serpent. 
frightened on seeing the red twilight. Taking it for 
Garuda and bending low its hood it entered into the nether world.58 
The lotuses closed their petals. The bees censed 
humming and remained motionless and appeared as though 
the lotuses became silent observing a penance is it were 
57 to get back their husband the sun. 
In this context, a famous pas a;e from Sisupalavadha 
is worth quoting. The setting in of the moon at dawn 
and the rise of the sun in the east a co iceived by 
Magha as two shining bells suspended on each side of 
50 
the elephant, the Raivata hill. This description 
61 
gave Magha the name Ghanta Magha, 
Ghanta Magha,as pointed out by 
Vallabhadeva in his commentary. 
udayati vitator hvarasmirijjāvahimarucau 
himudhamni yati castam 
vahati girirayam vil mbighaptādviviparivārita- 
vir pend.1īlim 
(disunil va IV.20) 
The gradual appearance of dawn with the receding 
darkness behind it and the emergence of the rays of 
the sun, the rise of the dise of the sun gradually from 
the eastern horizon and its colour is graphically depicted 
with meticulous care in Canto XIX. 
Water sports: 
The delightful pastimes such as sport in water, 
drinking and amorous activities including separation 
of the lovers are described in Cantos VIII, IX and XIV, 
While describing Krepa's Rasalila, the author 
takes the opportunity to depict Krspa's indulgence in 
water sports. The women who took part in this sport 
had the lac dye smeared on their feet, the black pigment 
applied to their eyes and sandal paste smeared on their 
limbs. These were all cleared by the waters of the 
Yamuna as though the river was jealous of them. In 
fact, the natural beauty of those women manifested by 
these waters and so it was indeed a blessing for these 
62 
мотел, 
As the cowherdesses plunged deep into the waters 
of the Yamuna, the level of the water rose up, with the 
75 
result that the lotuses disappeared beneath the waters, 
The author fancies that the lotuses became ashamed of 
the charming face of these women and so disappeared from 
53 
the scene. 
Describing Krspa's activities as a house-holder, 
the author gives a description of the pleasure garden, 
sport in water, and drinking bouts. Krspa is described 
to have become himself the spring season. While the 
trees 
garden with its fine rows of represented the body-frame, 
Λ 
the flowers, fruits, bees, sprouts and branches represented 
the smile, breasts, eyes, hands and arms of the women 64 respectively and his con 'orts thus delighted Krapa. 
Krye's snort in water is described referring to 
the syntes used by him to sprinkle the saffron-mixed 
wer on woven, which kindled in them a longing to be 
. 
low ver, all these deeds of his with which he 
Province enjoy, nt to the rts' coulent of the women- 
56 
folk were w the bounts of dr 17. 
76Marriage Procession: 
Normally poets. find delight in depicting marriage 
processions either of the bride-groom on his arrival 
67 for marriage, or the procession of the wedded pair. 
The women of the city are described to have displayed 
their feelings mixed up with curiosity as they beheld 
from their mansions the procession of Krapa and Rukaiņī.68 
Marriage: 
The marriage of Krspa with Rukmini is described 
in detail in Canto XIII. 
69 
The decoration of Rukmini is described in verses 
81 and 82, the pradaksina round the sacrificial fire 
in 84, the laia homa in 86, panigrahana in 88, santapadi 
in 89, the blessings of the Yadava elders in 95, and the benediction of the sages in 99.70 
rch and Battle: 
The march of the army is beautifully depicted in 
71 
Cuntos XX and XXII. Satyaki's digvilava is described 
in Surga XXII, with the places visited by Satyaki.72 
77 
Battle scenes are noticed in the following Cantos. Cantos: XV - encounter between Krspa and Sisupala 
XVI - between Krspa and Narakasura 【Ś1.74–106) XVII - Indra against Garuda and Krṣpa (Ś1.50-81) 
XX - between Krspa and Bapa assisted Rudra 
(51. 11-77) 
XXII - Satyaki subduing the various Kings 
(81. 58-235) 
Junting: 
This is described in Canto V-1.13 to 35 
ero's Greatness: 
Krsna's eminence is well brought out by the minstrels 
ho sang his praise while awakening Him from slumber. It 
ust be noted here, that each description of dawn has some 
eference direct or indirect, suggestive of Krşpa's great- 
833. 
It is modelled on the brief description of the same 
atural scene offered by Bapa in his Kadambari just before 
he advent of the army of hunters. This is reminiscent of 
he verses sung by the minstrels addressed to Aja, when he 
as camping in the royal tent provided by the father of 
78 
73 Magha describes 
IndumatÏ, just before Svayamvara.73 
a similar scene in Canto XI where Krspa's greatness 
is suggested by the minstrels.74 
The poem contains 8totras in praise of Vigpu and 
Krapa separately on various occasions, about fourteen 
in mumber. These are in Cantos I, III, VII, IX, X, XV, 
XVI, XVII, XIX and XX. These are religious and philosophical 
in tone in the main, though they vary in contents according 
as the contexts demand. However, they have the main thread 
of uniformity, namely that the concept of the deity as 
held in the Visistadvaita system is always kept in view. 
Thus the poem is an ideal Mahakavva conforming to the 
marks of a kavya as stated by Dangin in his Kavyadarsa 
(I. 14 to 19). The Kavya opens with a prayer addressed 
to Lord Krspa. The theme is based on Krspa's stories 
Created in the Vispupurana, the Bhagavada and the Harivansa. 
The hero is Udätta. 
Apart from the description of cities 
Dvaraka, ocean, 
ountain, Govardhana, seasons, the rise of the sun and the 
oon, the poet describes: 
79 
Indra's garden 
8port in water 
XVII. 13.44 
VIII. 94 to 112 and 
XXIV. 24 to 27 
Sports using 
XXIV. 32 
balls 
Rasalila 
VIII. 72 to 75 
Sensuous sport 
XXIV. 64, 66, 67 and 73 
Gambling 
XXIV. 49 
Drinking 
XI. 79 
Love in 
VIII. 72 to 95; IX. 77 to 113 
separation 
Birth of a son II. 96; XII. 1. 
The prosperous rise of the hero Krspa is frequently 
touched upon, by his over powering in battle, his enemies- Vido Narakāsuravada, Sisupālavadha, Pound rahavasudeva Vadha 
and Banasuravudha. 
Among rivers, the Yamuna gets a close description in 
Canto IIl. 40 to 42; 
the Ganges in XXII. 137 
the Godivari in XXII. p.159 
Ksirand 
(the palar) 
in XXII. 162 and 
the Cauvery in XXII. 165 to 167 
80 
Among animals, the horse gets a close description 
in IX. 14 to 23. 
Garuja is described among birds 
graphically while it was ready for Krapa's march to 
fight with Narakpura XVI. 51 to 61. 
Airavata among 
the elephants is described in XVI. 2 to 20. The pregnant 
condition of Devaki is described in Canto II 1. 1-36. 
It is the poet that describes this condition anticipating 
Krapa's birth. So there is more of poetic imagery in this 
description which draws frequent references to the birth 
of God. The divine aspects of the would-be mother have 
also a detailed depiction. The poet has evidently in 
mind the similar description in Canto III of Raghuvansa 
where Kalidasa describes Sudaksina's pregnant condition 
(III. 1 to 12). The poet does not touch upon the two 
saṁskārus, puñsavana and manthonayana. The punsavana 
and anthonayana samskara are mentioned by Kalidasa in 
Raghuvansa (III.20). 
The poem is embellished with the figures of sound 
and speech (See Appendix ). This kavya is not much 
condensed with reference to the topics t at are taken up 
for treatment. Possible exception may be rited to Canto 
XIII which describes very briefly the Mahabharata war. 
81 
82 
The author's aim in condensing this part of the Mahabharata 
story could have been due to the actual battle having much 
concern with the Fardavas and Kauravas. Of course Krspa played a vital role by being the driver of Arjuna's chariot. 
Besides, the significant role which Krapa played in the war 
could be taken as a teacher of the Gita to Arjuna. Certainly 
He safeguarded the persons of the pandavas and their lives. 
Since the Bhagavad-Gita which was addressed to Arjuna is of 
utmost importance in the description of the Mahabharata war, 
the other aspects of Krapa's role do not get primary importance. 
The essence of the Gita is elaborated in the other parts of 
the poem wherever the author describes Krsna's greatness as 
ultimate reality and refuge for the souls. This is evident 
in the prayers and praises offered by several persons 
Long whom Bhisma and Jambavan could be taken to have 
irectly brought out the Lord's eminence. 
The poem is hirhly sugestive and so there is constant 
reatment of Rasa and Bhava which are suggested. Many of 
he prayers as well as incidents like those 
of lifting up 
he Govardhana hill and the bringing of the Parijata tree 
ontain passages that bring out Kropa's Virarasa, though 
e other incidents too contain many elements evoking vīra. 
That Érngara is conspicious for its treatment is brought 
out in the description of Krapa's stay with the cowherdesses. 
Banta is ofcourse is the underlying current for the treatment 
of the theme in Kryppa's life. 
The Cantos are not unduly long except XXII which 
describes the victorious march of Satyaki. Since juncture 
(Sandi) has greater relevance in a drama, the kavya could 
not be expected to contain the proper allotment for the 
five sandis. Yet if Krapa's attaining eminence is to be considered as a goal of the poem, then Sisupala and 
Paundrakavasudeva are to be taken as having directly 
h challendged Krspa's status. Pratimukasanda can be said 
to illustrate the fight posed by these two opponents of 
Krspa. There is no scope in this poem for Garba and 
apamarsa sandi. 
The meters used are pleasant and suited to the 
subject matter treated (Vide Appendix ). The last 
aloka in each canto is composed in a meter different. from 
those in which the previous verses are composed. 
Some rhetoricians hold that a kavya could be 
divided into cantos an there should be the sequential 
connection between them. This att: ude could have been 
83 
suggested by the general aspects of a Mahakavya, namely 
that normally its treats the life of a single hero. This 
could be applied also to works like Raghuvans where 
there are many heroes. Unless the order is maintained 
between one canto and the another, the unity of the theme 
cannot be maintained. However this principle cannot have 
strict applicability in a poem like Yadavabhyudaya. Except 
that the prosperous life of Yadava, Lord Krepa gets treated 
in all the 24 cantos of this poem, each canto having a 
direct bearing on the acts and exploits of the Lord, there 
is no real thread between one cunto and another maintaining 
unity. Yet Cantos I to VI, VII and VIII, IX to XI, XII 
and XIII and XVI to XIX have sequential order well maintained 
It will not be an xxx empty tribute to the credit of 
the author Vedintadesika, if this poem is described to be 
delightful to the people (Resikas), with good decorative 
devices (sadrlankyti) and so the poem could endure for 
aeons. Much of the attraction which the poem arouses 
among the readers is solely due to the authors intuition 
and perfect execution of the various parts of the theme 
filled conveniently to form into a whole, a malākāvya. 
84 
NOTES 
85 
1. Daplin's Kavyadarse, 1-19. 
2. Bhamaha's Kavvalankara. Chapter I. 19-21. 
3. Visvanatha's Sahityadarpana. Chapter VI. 559. 
*. See Commentary on A. XXIV. 95 
5. See Prataparudriya S1.28. Nayana prakarana. 
5A. IA. XI. 42-72 
6. Ioid. XI. 4J 
7. Ibid. XI. 51 
of: commentary of Mallinatha on Raghuvamsa. I. 63 
ativiranavirmagika salabha sukaḥ 
atyasannaś ca rajanaḥ śadeta rtayaḥ smrtāḥ iti kamandak 
kamakrōdha lobha mohamadamatsaryarupairürmibhip 
vide: Appayadiksita's commentary p. 473 under 
YA. XI.51. 
8. Ibid. VIII. 117-124 
9. Sisupalavadha, III. 33-63 
10. Ibid. III. 40 
11. YA. XI. 62. 
12. Ibid. XI. 58. 
13. A. XVIII. 129 
14. Cr: gisupalavadha. III. 55 and 56; and 
VI. 43 to 45. 
15. I, II, 72, 
1.7 
16. Sisupalavadha. III. 39 
17. YA. XI. 60. 
18. Sisupalavadha. III. 52; and IA. XI. 60 
19. YA. XVIII. 120 
20. Sisupalavada. III. 35 
21', TA. XI, ko 
22. Ibid. XI. 69 
23. Ibid. XVIII. 118 
24. Raghuvamsa. XIII. 1-17. 
25. Sisupalavadha. III. 76-81 
26. YA. XVIII. 83 
27. Ibid. XVIII. 95 
28. Raghuvansa. XIII. 13 and 14. 
29. Sisupalavadha. III. 73 
30% YA. XVIII. 101-404 
31. Ibid. XI. 68. 
32. Sisupalavadha. III. 36. 
33. YA. VI. 5-43;.VIII. 35-37 and XVIII. 
8634. Sisupalavadha. IV. 2-20 
35. A. XVIII. 34-37 
36. Ibid. XXII. 115–127 
37. Ibid. VI. 14 
38. Ibid. VI. 18 
39. Hoid. VI. 34 
40. Tid. VI. 42; cf: Sisupalavadha. IV. 42 
41% Ibid. VI. 78 
42. bid. VIII. 37 
43. Ibid. XVIII. 7 
44. Ibid. XXII. 115 
45. Ibid. V.3: 
Spring. Vasanta VIII. 1-40 
Summar. Grisma V 
1-73 
Varga V. 
360048 
Autumn. Sarat 7. 
49-94 
VII. 
Winter. Hemant XXN 
46. Tic. V. 5 
47. A. V. 12 
48. This. V. 38 
87 
49. XA. V. Andy 
50% Toi, V. 61 
51. Ibid. VIII.,7 
52. Ibid. VIII. 10 
53. Cf: Kumarasambhava III. 24-39; and 
Raghuvansa IX. 25-41 
54. ef: Kiratariuniva 
Vasanta X. 31 - 35 
Grişma X 
36-38 
Varşa 
X 
1924 
Sarat 
IY 
1225 
Hemanta X 
28 30 
55. IA. II. 54 
56. Ibid. II. 61 
57. Ibid. II. 38 
58. Ibid. II. 42 
59. Ibid. II. 47 
60. Sisupalavadha. IV. 20 
61. 
See fact note under Tv 20, of dis upala vadha 
62. YA. VIII. 102 
63. Ibid. VIII. 105; 
ef: Raghuvansa. XVI. 
Sisupälavadha. VIII 
Kiratar univa. Yhti 
and 
88 
64. YA. XXIV. 13; Fine Kalpaka plants of: Magha IV.35 
65. Ibid. XXIV. 27 
66. Ibid. XXIV. 34 
67. Ibid. XIII. 41-72. 
cf: Raghuvansa. VII. 6-15 
Kumarasambhava. VII. 56-68 
Sisupalavadha. XIII. 31-47 where Kyspa's 
arrival at Hastinapura is described. Asvaghosha 
describes a similar scene in a different context 
viz., when Buddha went out of the city. Buddha- 
charita. III. 13 and 14 
68. YA. XIII. 44-70 
69. Marriage of Rukmini YA. XIII.82 
70. 
ef: Raghuvansa. VII. 19-28 
Janakiharana. IX. 52-64 
Padvacudamani. IV. 40-53 
71. of: Stupavadna. XII and XVII 
72. ef: Komuvansa. IV. 
73. ig. V. 66-74. 
74. Sisupil v dun. XI. 8,9,12,15,22,24,25,32,33,44,47,58, 
62,65. 
89 
CHAPTER 
CULTURAL 
GLEANINGS 
CULTURAL CLEANINGS 
In a poem like the Yadayabhyudaya, which is based 
entirely on the Pauranic sources, the author does not 
depict the state of society during his days and the 
customs and practices of the people forming that 
society. With the background of a cultural and 
detached look at the world, the author is not interested 
in presenting an ancient theme in modern environments. 
Yet there are references here and there to what 
can be considered as throwing light on the social 
cortions during the period of the author. Taking 
the home as the nucleus for the development of society, 
we come across the practices of people who undertake 
certain observances to prevent evil forces that attack 
them now and then. Nandagopa and Yasoda did raksa, 
a protective device or amulet to ward off the evil 
spirits affecting the child Krsna, after the demoness 
Puts was sucked to death. The device consisted in 
tying, around the neck of the child, a string or chain 
90 
bearing the marks or emblems in seals of the five 
weapons of Vigpu so as to make him immune from the 
attack of evil spirits. 
1 
The marriage celebrations are described in 
detail with the descriptions of the tying of the 
2 
bridal string on the wrist of Krsna, the worship 
of the fire, the homa with fried grains (laia hos 
(santapad) taking seven steps the bridegroom 
following the bride and lifting the foot of bride 
stop 5 
and placing it on a stone. The elderly members 
of the Yadavas offered them their blessings. 
7 
6 
The marriage' procession and women of the 
city beholding it with deep interest and fervour 
are also described, in almost the same manner 
as Kalidasa, Buddhagoga and Kumaradasa have 
depicted them. 
8 
Regarding the people and their habits the 
author's observations afford an interesting reading. 
t'in 
It is stated that in Sindhu and Kamboja the women 
91 
9 
folk are made to work iike men. 
The Colas are described 
o have been defeated at the hands of Satyaki and they 
ook to their heels. The author perhaps has in his mind he incapacity of the Colas for not having retaliated he attack on Srirangam by the Muslim forces under 
alikkafur. He has a dig at the Cola army and uses 
he phrases that the Cola warriors were good at fleeing 
10 
way from battle. The warriors in Kalinga opposed 
ityaki but got defeated by him and were made to wear 
le marks of discus (Cakra). The word cakra means some 
nd of emblem given to some warriors as to identify 
11 
em as defeated persons. Or it may be, that the mark 
the discus imprinted on their bodies was to identify 
em as the devotees of Vispu. Or this may be an indication 
support of Sankha Cakrankapa, one among the five 
remonial purifications (pancasamskara) which a devotee 
Lord Vismu should have, but there is no mention of 
ich in this context. 
While Satyaki passed through Tundiramandala 
which Kanci is the capital, the author glorifies 
place as one which is filled with sacrificial 
lars yupastambha, a place devoid of all evil and 
92 
evidentaly the Svetadvipa, an island where the 
exclusive Dharma of the paramaikantin prevailed. 
12 
The author speaks of certain beliefs which 
are found in the Sastras and which cannot be called 
superstitious beliefs. One should not see the moon 
on the fourth day of the bright fortnight as it is 
inauspicous. According to the commentator this 
refers to the moon of the fourth day of the bright 
fortnight of the month of Bhadrapada? The Author speaks of one common language Bharati throughout 
the land but having several courses in the form of 
dialects or languages belonging to the different 
regions'. 
93 
NOTES 
1. Yaravabhyuday, TV, 09 
2. Ibid. XIII,84. 
3. Thed. XII1.86, 
4. Ibid. XIII.89. 
5. Ibid. XIIJ.93. 
6. Tid. XIII.95. 
7. Ibid. XIII.44-65. 
8. Raghuvansa. 7.5-16. 
Kumar sambhava, 7. 57–61 
AsvaChoga's Buddhacarita. 3. 13-24 Kumaradasa's Janakiharapa. 9. 52-64 
Buddhaghosah's Padyacudamant. 4. 55-61 
9. Yadevabhvudava, XXII. 113 
10. Ibid. XXII. 171 
11. d. XXII. 153. cf: Raghu's attack on Kalinga in 
the Raghuvans, IV. 40-41 
12. Kravaliovudaya, XXII. 160–61. 
13. b. I. 22. 
94LITERARY ESTIMATE 
ALANKARA 
A study of the poem Yadavabhyudaya 
the author's contribution in respect of (1) alankara 
(2) rasa (3) prosody (4) grammatical usages and 
(5) didactic statements. 
Poets adopt invariably certain devices to 
enhance the beauty of their poems by investing their 
expressions and the meanings with the employment of 
figures of speech (alankara). 
Sabdalankara: 
Desika, following the poetic tradition which 
1 
he has inherited employs Sabdalankara of various 
kinds. There are slokas which come under the types 
2 
of Yamaka in Canto VI of the kivya. Prahelika is 
used in VI.48. Labial sounds are avoided in VI. 78 
and 79. There are slokas with single letters and 
double letters; VI.96; VI. 80 to 90. There is 
Cakrabandha in VII.74, which contains the name 
95 
96 
of the author Venkatanatha and the name of the poem 
Yadavabhyudays. 
3 
It is clear from these that the author has displayed his skill in this under the influence of Sisupalavadha 
Canto XIX. That he had intended to follow the poetic 
tradition in the use of Śabdalankaras is clear from the 
Bloka VI.108; where he declares that it would be possible for him to employ 10,000 kinds of Sabiacitra; but restrains 
himself from it so as to continue the narration of Krepa's 
life. 
aklişţacitramidam atra managivoktam 
citrayutani suvacani punastathapi 
ktyaṁ vibhor-nigamaniyam-ananya-bhaktaip 
aradhyatan harirasau prthividharatma (IA.VI.108) 
Arthalankara: 
The author reveals himself as a consummate 
artist in effectively handling the alankara-s for 
heightening the description of the objects, situations 
and incidents. Even the prayers addressed to God are 
replete with the use of one or another kind of alankara-s used 
with effect. 
97 
Poetic fancy of the author finds itself in the 
employment of figures for each aspect of the description 
of a matter with the result that more than one figure gets 
mingled to be named as Sankara, Besides, upama, utprekjā, 
atisayokti and other well known figures abound in this 
poem. 
Appayya Dīkşitл observes at the beginning of his 
Citramining that Upamalankara is the basis for all 
figures of speech. 
upamaika sailuşi samprapta citrabumika-bhedan ranjyuti kavyarange nrtyanti tadvidam cetab 
(Citramimamsa. p.33) 
The alankaras are classified into two groups 
called Svibhāvokti and Atiśavokti. Vakrokti and 
Atsigavokti were raised to prominence by Bhartha. 
5 
The author employs the figure of speech 
Svalhavarti on sev·ral occasions. It is hard to 
pick out one, as more elegant tuin others. The huge 
bulls with their bellowing sounds, i lf-closed eyes, 
long and great horns, slightly turned mouths, bore the corentinl 
rains for a moment with anger and 
fortitude. 
sahumkytāḥ saminimilitaksa dirghorusrnga 
darabhugnavaktrap 
pratyagrahíṣup pratipennarosa dharah kṣapam 
• 
h 
dhairyarto mahokgap (YA.VII.29) 
Simile crowns the head of all alankaras and no poet 
3 resisted the temptation to use this figure in preference 
others. For variety and simplicity Valmiki is unexcelled. 
insa comes next, and he is followed by Magha. Vedanta 
ixa too has adopted the way of these writers. 
Among several slokas which illustrate this figure 
speech, upumb the following verse which speaks of the 
tion of kas to slay Kp my be cited. weakened 
Timone for what hapnd before to his evil 
LIP 
i, prouted by tia pod of d th who was actuated 
of, a decided to kill Krpa 
if it' The fire-My atmnting to put out the 
. fire. 
iti vior is Travowsing 
· 
Six no dint value is (YA.EX.6) 
98 
anea is aptly compared to the fire fly because of 
is weakness and insignificance. Kaspa growing from 
trength to strength is justifiably referred to as the 
Lazing fire. Like the consuming fire, Krsna is capable 
I quickly destroying anybody (asusukapi). The Gods who 
oproached Visu for succour refer to His descents invarious 
les, providing the selves with astonishment. He is aptly 
mpared to an actor. The use of the words Bhumika and 
sa add to the effect of simile here. 
7 
The next prominent figure of speech is Utpreksa. 
e author describes the advent of the autumn after 
• rainy reason. The three worlds were put to rest 
it were due to rainy season. The clouds are imagined 
have put the worlds to sleep. On the passing away of 
: rainy season, the clouds recede and the sky becomes 
ar indicating the setting in of the autumn. The world 
ones active as if it is aroused from sleep. The author 
cies that the three worlds (jagattray a word in feminine 
der) acted at this time like a chaste woman attending 
n her husband in Árapa who becomes active during this 
son after the Yoganidra. The Lord takes now to activity 
the world too appears to follow her Lord in becoming 
99 
wake. Here there is too real a background for 
gining the activity of the three worlds was in 
onsonance with the activity of Krspa. Yet sleep 
wd awakening which are fancied with the face of 
he world are treated to be in close conformity 
Kropa's inactivity due to Yoganidra and activity 
8 
n autumn. Hence this is a case of Ul 
BOLCH 
Some specimen examples of the other figures 
speech found in the poem are the following. 
Brisankhys 
racurnama tato jajne yasantatis amudbnavaip 
samanagapanalekhya nissamanairnijadyate 
(YA.1.20) 
King Yadu is counted as one among eminent kings 
it has no equal in life. ile is samina or equality 
tn others only through painted figures along with 
arse 
Cinama: 
sahasrabhānuprumkchain samantajjyotirgaparasya 
vighuramanaih 
manībnstamagrasarasya manye nirajanam viśvasṛjā 
prayuktan 
(L.XVIII.7) 
100. 
For those who meditate upon Krapa who was thus bound, their bondage with Krma gets broken without 
any effort on their part. The poor princi∙le of 
tatkratu which is powerful remain with shame in the narratives contained in the Aranyakas. Here tatkratu 
rule is fancied by the poets to have been confined to 
the narratives in the Aranyakas 1.9., they remained 
only in the aranyaha works and did not get applicable 
in life. This is the reason for that principle to 
become ashamed. That this stay of this principle is 
known through aranyaka waning, also forests 18, they 
could not go elsewhere through shame. Therefore the 
figure of speech is Kavyalinga. 
Dekha 
anapayan tamadityamakşayam tārakяdhipam 
aparumantambhodaimamanyanta divaukasağ (YA.1.74) 
Go's considered Vigu as the sun which does not set, 
as the moon which does not vane, and the milky ocean 
which is shoreless. Hence lekku alankīrs. 
102 
Arthantaranasa 
103 
avancitanyйnapayappradanan aradhakan kalamiyantamindral ahārakaryadabhihantumaiochat kṛtānabijegu kimingśamsyan 
(YA.VII.12) 
Indra who got enraged at the cowherdesses who 
stopped worshipping him. He was offered worship 
formerly with milk by the cowherdesses. This act is 
treated as amounting to ingratitude. This is generalised 
in the statement that those who are ungrateful would not 
be sympathetic. Hence Arthantaranasa. 
Vrajastutis 
stanyena kuah saha putanayah prapan papau 
luptapunarbhavayap 
yadadbhutan bhavayatan jananan stanandhayatvam 
na punarbabhuva 
(YA.IV.4) 
Krypa sucked the life of Putana along with her 
breast milk; thereby she got released. Those who reflect 
upon this became also rid of rebirth. Here gods deed is 
praised under the pretext of describing the failure of 
Aitana's effort. This is called Vrajastuti. 
Firothabhasa : 
104 
gupasindhurasau gupativarti gativantassthitiragamaika 
ganyan 
dayitnзahito daya ikasangi gururadyo mayi gauravAN 
vidnata (XA.XV.5) 
He is an ocean of qualities and at the same time 
beyond them. Gupa in the former means auspicious qualities 
and in the latter the three qualities of matter. He is within 
and without, but he is to be known only through agama. The 
word gati means goal and the word ganya means to be known, 
the root remaining the same with both. He is with Rukmiɲī 
but He is attached only to daya. This is contradictory and 
He must be taken to be ever with Rukmini and daya is with 
him in that position. 
FUNDCYOUR: 
u'anwati vyom-tale ca lagnam draobhayah darpapa. 
darsaniye 
yamadolatamatmapurim ca devaschayan manyanta mithap 
(YA. XI.42) 
The Jocs fout the enty of Dvara reflected in 
« mirror-like ses and saw the city in the sky. Dvapake 
is here compared to Amrivati, the capital of God and 
Amravati vita Dwarak al benow Upaypal. 
105 
Maariana: 
gupodadhim yap pramitaprampaya gira tvadīyan 
parimatumicchati 
sa patumiheta samagracapalak payoja (saroja) malena 
payah payonidhim (dheb) (YA.XIV,51) 
He who tries to praise 
God's limitless qualities 
with his expressions which are limited does seek to drink 
the milky ocean by using the lotus stock. Hence Hidaríam. 
Prayag: 
Jananimiva tan lakgayaḥ pathonidhipativratan 
niyamairucitairbheje nigamakhyatavaibhavam (IA.XXII.169) 
Satyaki worshipped the river Kaveri who was the mother of Lakṣnī. Here Kāveri is considered as the giver of one's 
desires and so she was treated as Lakṣmi's mother. Hence 
Prevag is the alankara. 
Ddattat 
prakhyatad hamnampi dikpatinan prasadavāsādara- 
wakg i pantal 
ratnaguhaviseja (YA.XVIII.8) 
adayasita yogibhirasya nityan rājantyamīThe Tegins dwell in the caves set with 
gems in the Mount Meru. The guardians of quarters 
who reside in mansions leave off their attachment to 
their abodes, on seeing these caves. Hence Udatta is 
the figure of speech. 
Samec ava: 
atha jaganti babkuivuranavilanyatimira haritaḥ 
pracakasire 
devadivakare 
abhajadeva nisa divasaśriyam jananabhajini 
(YA.III.1) 
106 
When the sun arose the worlds became active rid 
off their slumber. The directions became clear with 
darkness leaving them. The night became thus the day. 
These actions are described to take place at the same 
time and so the figure is SAMUCC ATA. 
Yirodha: 
kygpapakgamapi prāpya sa rājā vióvaranjakaj prapadyata para vṛddhim sumanap svadanakyama 
(YA.X.110) 
Ugrasena favoured the entire world though he took 
sides with Kupa. At the same time the scholars rejoiced 
at this. Here there is contradiction between Gods who de 
107 
not get any satisfaction in the black fortnight and 
Ugrasena who gave delight to scholars (Gods and SamaMAN). 
Hence Virodha alankara. 
Samsreta 
jātā nikhilavedanamat tamangopadhānatap 
tvat padakamaladeşa tvade kadhinadharapā (IA.I.79) 
The world is produced from the lotus like feet of 
the Lord which is the pillow for the Vedas. So He alone 
is competent to protect it. The feet are identified with 
the pillow where the Vedas rest. The alankara is Rupaha. 
The word lotus-like feet gives rise to upama. The two are 
conjoined so as to give rise to the figure Sansrti. 
Rupaka: 
vi odhitādvigpupadāt kgaranti viśvanmukhi 
sagaravidchihetop (tub?) 
(YA.II.70) 
tamomayin suryasutan nigirya jyotsnanadī 
Κ 
sonamapi vyamuncat 
The moon arose and fourseas began to ebb and they 
were like Ganga which spread on all sides rising from 
Visgu's foot. Moon light de voured darkness like Gangs 
taking Yamink into it. Though the red colour is there 
108 
as it rises it disappears in a short while. Similarly 
the red waters of Sond get mixed up with the waters of 
Gangã, but disappears as Ganga enters into the sea. 
Iratireka: 
abhangurarasan bhogyamanapayan rasayanan 
akşayan dharmasarvasvamavidustava kīrtanam (IA.X.69) 
To sing the glory of Kyspa is an eatable whose taste 
is ever present there; an elixir that would never lose its 
vigour and the fruit of dharma that never gets exhausted. 
Here the contrast is between the singing the glory of 
Kyspa and bogya, rasayana and dharmasarvasva. This is 
Iratirek.&. 
Atiliavokti: 
yathasvaa nagaradvare yadavā dānavaśca tam 
tarasy 
sviṇaruḍārūcham satyamaikşanta tatkşapan (YA.XVI.73) 
Garuda flow so speedily that the Yadavas beheld him in Dvaraka and the demons saw him at the same moment ut Pong- 
That shows the case of Atišavokti. 
A That shows 
Parikarankura : 
109 
prabhutadharapratipannasaityan praptaramadria 
prabhuradbhutanam 
sudarsanadapyadhikamanaisīt pavitratām papi- 
sarojayogat (IA.VII.70) 
Krapa held the Govardhana hill with his hands and 
made it more pure than His own discus The hill became 
• 
chill with the down pour of rain (dhara) which word 
means also the sharp edge of Sudarsana. Again, there 
was violent sound on hills by the water falls. The 
discus had the spokes. The adjectives dhara and ara 
show that they serve a purpose to glorify the hill and 
hence Farikarankura. 
Prativasturama: 
subhug.mupalabimbe sitakumbhe 'pi'ratnam 
kanati vipinabhage kalakapthe'pi ganga (YA.XIII.109) 
vaśikangpugghe sā vāsudeve'pyadīvyat 
na hi bhavati višeṣaḥ kvāpi nityannatānās 
Rukmini was letrothed to Sisupala. The author feels 
sad that one had to remember this event. A gem whether 
it is a stone or gold does not lose its worth, The river 
110 
Gangh flows in the forest and is also in the head of fiva. Likewise she had a name mentioned with disupala at one time 
but she was ever with Krapa later. So she has not leat 
anything. This is the case of Prativastunam • 
There are several lokas to illustrate the figure 
Sankara. God has no limits through space or time. He is an illustration for Himself, as there is no one like 
him. Here is the figure of speech Irat ireka and also 
ananvya. Therefore the alankara is Sankara. 
Samsokti 
praunahasad harapallavanan kinjalkaromancajugama- 
bhunkta 
Bandanilairahitave pathunan kantin vasanto vanava- 
llaripam 
(YA.VIII.12) 
The spring season enjoyed the wild creepers which 
displayed their smile through the blossoms and sprouts 
conveyed a thrill through the Kinjalka filaments and 
a trumbling caused by the gentle wind. This description 
presented to the mind the enjoyment of a man (spring) 
vith a woman (creeper). Hence Samsokti. 
Rupaka and Utprekṣā get mixed up Mas Sankara 
in IV.10. 
Atisayokti and Kavyalinga get mixed up in Sankara 
AY.75. 
111 
LOTES 
1. It is worth noting in this connection that the 
author makes a similar use of Sabdalankīrs in his Padukisahasra. The author marks two flekas with 
his name XXX.31 and XXX.30. The former is in the 
form of Cakra, while the latter is in the form of 
eight petalled lotus. 
2. See Appendix. IV 
3. Cf: Magha's dvyakşara. No. of slokas xx bb,84,86,94,98,100 
102, 104, 186, 18, (in) Vedanta Deśika's dvyakgara. No. of slokas vi·78-40, 98 (M) Bandha's of Desika not noticed in Magha, vide appendix 
4. Rupaka I. 47; Parinama. I. 50. 
Vakrokti I. 51; Anarvava I. 55 
Utproksa I. 66; Karvalinga I. 69 
Vyatireka X.69; Vrttvaruprasa XVII.134 
5. Vakrokti is not here the name of the figure of 
speech; but means the poetic way of giving expression 
to ideas. 
6. Among the other slokas illustrating this figure 
of speech Svabhavokti the following may be mentioned: 
A. 1.73; IV.20, 25; VII.30. 
112 
7. For Enamilanbars. A. 1.49; V.61 
Etursion. IN. V.93, 90; II. 31, 63; VII.34 
113 
RASA 
114 
Poetry is evocative of sentiments by arousing 
the emotions. The main sentiments in the Yadavabhyudaya 
are Śrngara, Vīra and Adbhuta as suggested by the 
author while describing the child conceived in the womb of Devaki.1 
There are sufficient materials which go to indicate that the Srngararasa has its due presentation 
in the poem. This sentiment is presented in two 
ways. 
One is its effect on the flora and fauna and 
on the cowherdesses. When the spring season sets in, the effect on palasa, 2 cuckoo, campaka, 
4 
cowherdesses, etc., is vividly depicted in Canto 
VIII. Here there is the depiction of this sentiment 
at a greater length than what is found in Kumarasambhava, 
Canto III The author follows evidently Magha, who 
dwells at length on the treatment of this sentiment. 
Here nature and the human world become the alambana- 
vibhava while the spring season becomes the uddipana- 
Yibhava. The reactions that are noticed on these as 
115 
result of the advent of spring, are the transient motions gancanibhavart 
The other kind of depiction of this sentiment is 
n relation to Krsna and the cowherdesses. Krępa and 
he cowherdesses are the alambana vibhava and the spring 
s the udd Ipanavibhaya. The charming appearance and 
he sweet utterances of Krapa arouse rati in the 
owherdesses which grows intensely by Krspa's playing 
n the flute, Krapa's sudden disappearance from their 
idst gives the author an opportunity to delineate the 
bve-in-separation, which is considered by the rhetoricians 
3 essential for the development of rasa. 
The young cowherdesses were much pained and were aving long sight? The ground beneath the trees were rewn with flowers, the women had their mental functions 
endered dull by their infatuation for Krsna. The author 
love-41 
serves that the utterances of the Gopis were such 
3 
I to produce calmness to Yogis as they effused the 
agrance of Vedantic truths. 
10 
Krsna who chose to keep himself away at times 
om the presence of these women, mude his appearance 
8after a short while and the author notes that they 
beheld him as though he was reborn and were immersed 
in intense・・ joy.11 The climax of the further 
developments in the attitudes between Krspa and 
cowherdesses is presented in the form of rasallia and jalakrida in thirty slokas.12 
As Kropa and Balarama departed from Gokula 
along with Akrura, the cowherdesses actually bewailed, 
13 
feeling a personal loss. They pursued him, rather ran after him crying like the kurari birds. 
14 
The ir 
bangles slipped down from their hands and they were experiencing canalata (sancaribhava), which did not make them decide whether to follow him or stop going further.15 They were feeling that, as they were 
rustic women, they were left behind. 
: 
16 
him 
Virarasa has received adequate delineation in 
the poem. The permanent emotion (sthayibhava) is enthusiasm (utsaha) which is defined as an endeavour 
steadily made with regard to matters that are above the 
level of ordinary people.17 Krypa is the alambanayibhava. 
116 
He makes his enemies like Sisupala, Narakasura, Bāpa, Paupḍraka Vasudeva and others become the locus for the development of Vira. The latter is depicted in Cantos 
XV, XVI, XX and XXI. 
In Canto XX, the fight between Krapa and Bapa 
is described with the employment of Utpreksa. However, 
it must be admitted that nowhere did Krsna suffer even 
the slightest injury from any one of his enemies. This 
may be taken to show to some extent that in the case of 
Krspa there was not much room to show that he was ever 
ferocious or enraged at enemies' camp or was knitting 
the eye-brows, unable to bear the insult. Hence the 
enemies alone may be said to have had much of the display 
of the aspects of heroism. No doubt Krspa had utsaha in 
order to control the situation on these occasions. 
Satyaki's victorious march is described in Canto 
XXII, is many encounters with enemies and princes and 
their defeat at his hands are well portrayed. Similarly, 
Canto XXIII, gives a very brief description of the battle 
between the Kauvaras and Papdavas. On the whole, though 
it may be claimed that Virarasa is dominant in this poem, 
117 
there is not enough material to justify this, except 
18 
for the incidents, where Krapa and his associates 
and encounter with the enemies. Srngara has a better 
laim for the dominant rasa. 
Arbata has a limited scope in the poem. Its 
permanent emotion is Vismaya, which is defined as the 
xpansion of the mental activity at the sight of matters not witnessed before.19 
There are several occasions 
hen the dwellers of Gokula, cowherdesses, Indra, 
Indra, Narada 
m others were taken by the sentiment of wonder on 
fiin: Krspa exhibit certain powers of which they were 
never witnesses. The slaying of the men of Kamsa in 
Jokula, the dance on the head of Kaliya, the lifting of 
Jovrhana and similar incidents speak enough of Krspa's 
lity to bring forth before people the sights which 
uld not be or'inarly expected of men however gret 
hey may be. 
They in a recives much at ention at the hands of 
he uthor when he describes the rainy season in Conto 
VII. He shows therein how the thunderous clouds and the 
ins 
severe flashes of lighting the bellowing of oxen, were 
20 
rousing much terror for the rows and cowherdesses. 
118 
119 
Santa is another sentiment which gets its 
representation in the appeal made by Indra to Krypa for getting the latter's pardon for attacking Garuja 
to retain the Pārijāta tree. 
Among these sentiments, the author's aim in 
treating them is to uphold the claims of Santa, which 
however does not get an occasion for a direct delineation. 
It forms the basis for treatment of the theme. However 
it is Sngara that obtains the scope for a perfect and 
Next come Vira, Adbhuta 
all comprehensive treatment. Next come 
- 
and Bhavanaka. 
DEVANI 
Words express certain definite ideas. But 
there are many muances and subtle shades of meaning 
which cannot be denoted directly by the words. They 
have to be suggested through the usage of imagery or 
by the use of suggestive expressions. Poetry is full 
of such of them. Anandavardhana has pointed out that 
suggestion is the soul of poetry. And what poetry can 
suggest is not only ideas, but also figures of speech 
and sentiments. Vedanta Desika was fully aware of the importance of suggestion in poetry and made full use of his great command over the language. 
The emotions (bhava) are suggested by the use of 
certain words, certain situations and certain alankaras. For instance, the opening sloka conveys through the word 
Yand in the present tense, that deep affection, rati 
is ever present in the author which brings forth his 
21 
devotion to God. The Gods approach Visnu along with Bhudevi and sing his praise. In the course of their 
stotra, they praise Him as bringing to people, who 
have been in bondage, a state free from rebirth, as He 
is the sun that never sets. Those who are in bondage 
are said to be in sleep. The sun rises and wakes them 
up. They continue to be awake till night, but moksa 
which God offers is such that they need not ayvin m 
sleep. The words nidrana and jagara suggest bondage 
and final release. This is a case of Atisavokti. By 
" 
usta morge 
describing God as the sun who never se 
sets The suggestion 
is made that He becomes the sun so as to carry out the 
work of providing people with wakefulness, (iagarapa) and the figure of speech is parinama. Now 'ban setting' 
120 
121 
(Kyjna) 
of the sun becomes the cause for avoiing sleep kn 
after the sun sets and there is a Kavvalinga. While 
the sun which we all know, is rising and setting, this 
(A7284) 
sun does not rise and set. So the difference between 
L 
the two is shown here by Vvatireka; it is only suggested. 
Thus this is a case of Vyatirekalankaradhvani. 
2.2 
While describing the torrential rains, the author says that the sudden downpour made the lakes get filled 
up, shortly. The outlets provided, then made these lakes 
contain their water and also enable other lakes to have 
supply of water through them. Here there is comparison 
suggested between the lakes getting supply of water quite 
unexpectedly and people who become enormously rich without 
any efforts on their part. Though water could be retained 
in the lakes by providing an outlet for the supply of water 
which will flow and fill up other lakes, the wealthy man 
can retain his wealth by giving away what he has got as sur- 
plus to others who are in need and who will thus be enabled 
to receive it and live happily. The wealthy man thus gains 
lory which rives protection to his wealth. There is no 
mention in the sloka of words to convey upamana, upameya 
or sadharana dharma or words denoting comparison, yet the 
122 
simile is suggested. What is on hand is the water 
suggested, what is beyond context is wealth. There 
is the use of words like vana, saurddhi, tovasava, parivaha, gupti and unacava which have got the power to suggest 
comparison between the waters and wealth. Thus this is 
the case of Upamalankaradhyani. 
acintitopasthitajivananamaseduşamabhyadhikamsamrodhim 
toyasayanam parivahajanya svaguptiranyopacayaprada'bhut 
(YA.. 45) 
While describing Satyaki's victorious march, the 
author observes that the starting of the army produced 
an immediate effect on the celestial nymphs. According 
to convention, those who die in battle go to heaven and 
are received by the celestial damsels. At the very start 
of the army the celestial ladies were getting themselves 
ready to receive the warriors who lose their lives in 
battle. This cannot, however, hapien. The death of the 
soldiers could only come after they had taken part in 
battle. Here the starting of the army and the receptions 
which the celestial 1nd cs would offer them are said to 
take place at the same time. This suggests that warriors 
are bound to lose their lives quite quickly when the battle 
of the Alenama kind 23 
starts. Here is Atisavokti, figure of speech/which 
suggests the victory, a matter, Vastu that is suggested. It is a case of Vastudhyant.24 
prayanti prtana sadyah prapadairdyama purayat 
vairivasakasajjanam gapairapsarasamapi 
(YA XXII 61) 
There is also a secondary type of dhvani, in which 
suggested sense is subordinated to other factors. This 
is called Gunibhutavyangya 
25 eight in number. Among 
the several instances that illustrate this kind of 
Vyangva, the following sloka is worth citing. 
niradharanijast hemno nirupadhikasesinab 
nirapeksaniyantuste nis samabhyadhika gupah (YA.I.51) 
The Gods praised Visu as having his own stability 
that needs no other support as the principle seşin (Lord) 
which is unconditioned, controlling everything without 
the assistance of anybody and which has neither any one 
God as equal or greater to it. Here the qualities of 
are described in the four words. Hereus is watireka 
alankara, where, God's qualities have nothing equal to or 
123 
124 
superior to them, is suggested. Rather eminence, which 
is suggested by these words, is subordinated through 
the use of these words and hence this is a case of 
Sunībmitarvangva. 
NOTES 
1% Yadavābhyudava. II. 2 
2% Ibid. VIII.4. 
3% Ibid. VIII.5 
4. Ibid. VIII.7 
5. Ibid. VIII.64 
6. Kumarasambhava Canto III. 25-39 
7. Sisupalavadha. VI. 2-21 
8. IA. VIII. 72. 
9. The Gopikagīta in Bhagavata gives a detailed 
presentation of the love-born mental disposition 
of the cowherdesses, of: Bhagavata X. 31. 
Ibid. VIII. 73 and 74 
10. XA. VIII. 75 
11. Ibid. VIII. 78 
12. Ibid. VIII. 80-110 
13. Ibid. IX. 77-114 
14. Ibid. IX. 77 
15. Told. IX. 79 
16. Ibid. I. 94 
17. lokeţtareşu kāryaşu stheyān prayatnaḥ utsähap 
125 
(Prataparudrive p.154)16. Staupalavadh! XV 
Narakasuravadha, XVI 
Parliatapaharana XVII 
Berasuravuddha XX 
Pourdarakavasudeva XXI 
Satyaḥidigyijava XXII 
Bharatayuddha' XXIII 
19. aparvartha sandarsanaccitta vistaro vismayaḥ 
20. YA. VIII. 14-45 
DEVANT 
126 
21. XA. I. 1 
22. YA. I. 62. of: 1.43 where Vratirehalankaradhyani 
¿ å å 
23. Candraloka. 41 
24. agudhama parasyangam vacyasiddhajangamas phutam 
sandigdhatulya pradanye kakvaksiptamasundaram 
(Kavyaprakasa 
of: for few other instances in YA. I.66; IX.43; IX.100 
XI.42; XVIII.11. 
25. Prataparudriva. p.60 
METRE 
Words form a harmonious arrangement of long and 
short syllables, adapted to the different kinds of 
poetry and owes their origin only to the poets inspiration. 
That poetry precedes prose is held and maintained by 
the critics of all languages. It is therefore essential 
that a poet should be able to frame his ideas in words 
which would, in the combination of appropriate syllables 
primarily, evoke the sentiment and next suggest the 
situation. It is held by Kşemendra that Upajati is to be used for Śrngira, Rathodchata, for nature description, and Vamsestha for Niti, Vasent tilaka for Vira and Raudra Haripi for generosity, Prthvi for fury, Mandakranta for rainy season, love in separation and grief. Sardula- vikriditam for praising valour, and Sragdhara for tempests. 
However the poets have not been strictly adhering to this 
principle though what Kşemendra and others laid down should 
have been a reflection of the employment of metres by 
earlier writers. 
Secondly, Vedanta Desika seems to have followed 
the Chandahsutra of Pingula and Chundoviciti of Janasrya 
(600 A.D). Yet, like other noets,. he was not bound by 
rigid conventions. 
127 
Vedanta Desika employes thirty kinds of metres 
in his poem, with different metres in the sixth canto itself. Magha too employs 45 kinds of metres with 
eleven of them in Canto VI. Bharavi employs 26 kinds 
of metres with 15 in Canto V, and 15 in Canto XVIII. Sri Harga employés 20 in Canto IV and Sivasvamin who 
employs 43 kinds adapted 38 kinds of Canto VI. 
Vedanta Desika uses Upajati in ten cantos. He 
employs this metre Upajati for other descriptions 
like marriage and the return journey of Krspa to 
Dvaraka in Canto XII and XVIII respectively. Besides 
it is also used for describing Krapa's exploits in 
Canto IV and seasons in Canto V, Govardhanagiri in 
Canto VII. Rathoddhata is used in Canto XVII while 
dealing with Syamantaka upakhyana and fight with Bapa in Canto XX. The meagre mention of Gitopadesa 
in Canto XXIII may be taken to conform to Keemendra's 
dictum. Vasantatilaka is used in Canto XIX to arouse 
Krspa from his sleep. 
Prtvī, Vasantatilaka, Mandakranta, Sardūlavikrīdita are sparingly used. Haripi does not find a place. 
128 
Among the well known metres Upajati is most popular with 942 slokas here as in Kalidasa's works, Anuştubh comes next in the 647 lokas. Next in order come, Vamsastha, Aupachandasika, Ratoddhatā, Viyoginī, 
Vasantatilaka about 150 each. 
The rare metres used are Taralanayana VI, 39 which is called 'Hri' by Hemacandra, Vidyunmala, Simhavikrījita which is styled as Nisa by Hemacandra (Sudha by Appaya Diksita, Naracaka by Pingala), Mattamayura, Mattebha, 
Totaka and Narkuta which is the name of the metre 
mentioned only by Janasraya is treated by Desika and Śivasvamin. 
Desika uses Malini in the last sloka of 12th 
Canto. Like earlier writers, he does not give any 
mark for his identity in any Canto, although he mentions 
his name only at the end of the last Canto, like in all his works, stotras and Sastras. On the contrary, Bharavi gives the name Lakşmī, Māgha śrī,Ratnakara, Śivasvamin 'Siva' in the last sloka in each Canto of their poems. 
Ratna 
129 
130 
GRAMMAR 
Peets have all along been fully alive to the aim and purpose for which they undertake willing poetry. The subject matter is of great importance. The 
description of events follow one another in correct 
sequence. The figures of speech are used to present 
their poetical rendering with a charm that would make 
it attractive. There are also particulars in making 
use of certain constructions which could be justified 
on the basis of the rules of grammar as laid down by 
Papini in his Aştadhyayi. However, down from the 
period of Kalidasa, there have been cases where the 
use of expressions could not receive justification 
from the rules of Papini. The later grammarians 
could not justify such usages and explain them away 
by calling them as incorrect. However, the rules for such usages were laid down by rhetoricians like Bhamaha, 
Dangjin, Vamana and Bhoja. 
Vedanta Desika's poem contains a number of 
rare usages of grammatical forms which could be put 
under three heads 
131 
(1) Those which are rare but are correct according to 
the rules of grammar. 
(2) Those which are incorrect according to Papini but 
declared correct by the rhetoricians particularly 
Vamana 
(3) Those expressions which cannot get any justification 
from the rules of grammarians or rhetoricians. 
The only way open to give credit to such usages 
is either to declare that they do not conform to any 
rule or to get justification on the strength of similar 
usages by earlier poets. 
GROUP I: 
SAMPASTAMANA: (YA. II.10) 
According to the Varttika, the root 'drs' with 
sam takes Atmanepada. 
The word vacaspati, Vanaspati and divaspati 
(YA.XIII.5) have got the letter 's' inserted between 
the two words in the compound. The word vanaspati 
belongs to Paras kara group, and this takes 's' while 
vacaspati and divaspati are aluks amasas. According 
aluksamāsas. 
to the Papini sutra 'tatpuruse kri bahulam (6.1.14). 
and the visarga becomes 's' by the rule 'paraskara prabhrtini ca saminam. (6.1.157) 
SAROJANĀL 101: (YA. XV.2) 
The word nabhi must become nabha as the rule 
Semasantavichi anity makes the sutra get split 
up and so ge suffix dous not occur at the end of nabhi. For a similar usage of: Stilavacha 
Prada ivangidangvindan tren. (I¡I.65). 
MOZTAILANDAM JAYA: (YA. XXII. 197) 
Here accoin to the rule 'gendasvedutnati- 
Sus 1 bhub (1. sūtre 5.4.135)) a snould 
borone 'z nih.'. The Viritik, ekatasrihmon kartavyan' 
(3368) does not penis tuis vidlia in the case of the 
word smell which fementally cuires it; yet the rule 
of Pajin, should btn on the strength of the uses or use of eminent poet. like Sri Harya: 
apan ni trotīya nu vārinārī svādup 
sag.nl..di vadite tugir 
(Is dhe III. 94) 
132 
133 
GROUP II: 
GRAKARENA 
(YA.II.66) 
Here the meaning would be tip of the hand. In which case 'karagra' should be the form. To justify this formation Vamana writes: 
hastagrahastadayo gupagupinorbhedabhedabhyan 
according to which, the 'agra' tip which forms part 
of the hand could be treated as not different from 
hand. So there is grammatical co-ordination. samana- 
dhikarana 
the samasa for the compound must be of the 
Karmadharaya 'agrasca asau karasca tat padajananab IV.127. 
The rule 'na karnadharavat matvarthena bhavyan! 
is applicable only to the formation of Bhahuvrihi compound 
of samanadhikarapa type. This principle does not apply 
here, since the word means gana whose lanma is tat pada 
'from his foot'. Therefore it is a case of 'vyadhikarapa · 
bahuvrini'. Vamana remarks that words like janma and 
others become second members in a compound and BahuvŢîhi 
formation is allowed. 
DRDHABHAKTI: (YA.XVII.100) 
In a Bahurrini compound there may be the retention of the gender of the first member conforming to that of 
the second member. For example drdan bhakti vasva sah. Here the change of drdha into drdham is not permitted, since the word bhakti is included in the privadigana. 
However the use of this word here is justified by taking 
the word drihe not as an adjective to bhakti but changing 
to drdhan on the principle samanvena pumsakan. 
SARANTI: (YA. VIII.30) 
This word takes only Atmane pada. But this can be 
taken to be a root of Curadi class where Paras maipada 
is permitted optionally. 
GROJP ILI: 
ASA: (YA. VI.38) 
134 
This is used in the sense of war. 
This usage 
could not be defended unless it is taken to be a root 
ving some other sense like 'going', 'shining' and 
receiving. 
lavya upiony, ivasa yatnah (Kumarasambhava 1.35) lāvuva 
5: (YA. XXII. 30) 
The word is feminine in gender. Here it is used 
with the word 'parasparapraptagunena' which is 
masculine in gender. So bhasa will be taken as 
masculine in gender. For this usage refer to 
Venisamhara II. 8. 
135 
SMARAJANAKATANUH: (IA. XXIV. 58) 
The word smarajanakataruh is feminine in gender. 
This compound should be smarajanikatamuh. 
The change 
into masculine is prohibited by the rule na kopadhayah 
(Panini sutra 6.3.37). The present form can be justified by taking tam as Sakaranta napumsakalinga. Appayadīkṣita refers to a usage in Subhandhu's Tasavadatta in Sakaranta 
tamise tamuse kam.136 
DIDACTIC STATEMENTS 
A poet idealises the actual for serving an ulterior purpose, namely educating the people to lead better life. 
His work is not like that of a photographer to present the 
events, conduct of neople, their likes and dislikes as they 
are. If he does so, then no purpose would have been served 
by his boom. Therefore he would like to present the events 
not as they occur but as how they should have taken place. 
Setimes this may be against actualities. Therefore there 
1 on 11 st.c tie in whatever he writes. Some writers 
Sure Ved ̄nto Deshin, Appaya Dīksita and Nīlskaptha Dīkşita 
ove written inderendant works also preaching morals laying 
Le lims for oor beliviour. Subhaşitanivi of 
You into Derika is of this type. 
Writers like Kllidasa and Marla had offered in their 
compositional statements of the Artnantaranyasa 
ty, in is.ification of their treatment of occurrences 
o citu. ions. Fue uthor too provides in this Kavya many 
Stoints of lactic port, so as to bring home effectively the esciption taken up in the particular contend. The following messages illustrt mas tende cy. 111-57; VII-14; L4); D=74; DX-101; XI-15; XV-62; XX-72; 75, 89; XXII-9; LILI-12, 43; ALV-61. 
CHAPTER VII 
THE CONCEPTS OF VISISTÄDVAITA 
IN THE YADAVĀBHYUDAYA 
137 
THE CONCEPTS OF VIÁTSTÄDVALEH 
THE TĀDAVĀBHYUDAYK 
One of the chief aims of the author in writing this Kavya is to offer an authentic estimate of the Visingadvaita principles of religion and philosophy as preached and developed by Ramanuja. The figures 
of speech are employed by the author mostly conveying 
or suggesting the doctrines of Ramanuja's school of 
Vedanta. The prayers which abound in the poem are all 
mostly modelled upon the Upanisadie concepts and bring 
out the approach of the Vainava School to the Siddhanta 
arrived at, on the basis of the interpretation of the 
relevant Upanisadic passages. In this connection, it is 
relevant to note that the author was influenced in this 
respect by Kalidasa's version of the prayers in his poems 
The most prominent concepts of Raja's school 
of Vedanta areid 
1. sarirasariribhava 
2. sariralakspa 
3. creation abhinnanimitta - upadanakarapa of 
Livara. 
138 
4. Cidacidióvara lakyaja 
5. Causes for samsara, nature of self in bondage 
6. 
The means of attaining Brahman 
7. Bhakti and Prapatti, the means 
8. 
Conduct of bhakta-'s and the bhagavatas 
The relationship between cit the self, and acit 
the matter on the one hand, and Isvara, God, on the other 
2 
is that of body and soul. Body is defined as that which is sustained and controlled by God.3 Besides, the soul 
or self is subordinate to or dependent (sega) on God, 
4 
the highest principle. Both cit and acit are 
subordinate in the sense that they exist only to bring 
out, maintain and display the eminence of God. Just as a person is represented by the physical body in 
which the sentient soul (cit) is encased, so also 
both git and acit together form the body for God, who 
18 their inner controller (antarain) 5 
6 
Cit is eternal without undergoing any change and acit is eternal while ceaselessly undergoing changes (satatavikriva)?. Acit could never be conceived of 
139 
existing 
having the state of being non-existent, ie., separately from God. Its existence means, becoming manifested as effect in the form of gross (sthula) 
world and as remaining subtle (sukama) before mani- 
festation. In both cases, it is associated with God as His body. 
8 
Brahman is the soul for cit and acit which form 
the body. These three exist together and are in a 
subtle state (sukama), before creation. Brahman desires 
10 
or vills to manifest itself in the form of the world. 
Then the world of names and forms (nama and rupa)11 is 
brought into gross (sthula) existence. Like cit, acit 
too could never exist without Brahman. Creation means 
that the subtle becomes gross, that is, the subtle state 
gets transformed into that of the gross world. Thus Brahman is the material cause (upadanakarapa) 12 for the effect, viz., the creation of the world. 
Brahman itself brings about this change. Hence 
it is itself the instrumental cause (ninittakarang). Like vise, pralava is merging of the gross world (sthula) into its cause, the subtle world (sükgma). 
13 
141 
inkti potency, and adóvarya - sovereignty. íakki-potency, 
lívara has five form through which He manifests Himself making Himself available to the worshippers and the people at large. 
They are: 
1. Para - the supreme one abiding in a place called Sri Vaikunta made of Sattvim material free 
from raias and tamas. 
2. Truha-here, God divides Himself into four forms 
Vasudeva, Sankarṣapa, Pradyumna and Ahiruddha, 
for the purpose of creation, maintenance 
and destruction. 
19 
3. Vibhava where the Lord takes divine descents 
(avatara) for the well-being of humanity. 
These are 39 in number as mentioned in 
Ahirbudhnyasanhita20 
4. Antarvamin-is the form in which God dwells 
5. Arca 
· 
within the self controlling and guiding 
its destiny. 
21 
- is the finite form of Infinite assumed 
to fulfil the particular aspirations of 
devotees from time to time. It is present 
22 
in the form of an idol enshrined in temples. 
The Supreme Being is called Vigna, with His consort śr1.23 There were atleast four currents of 
thought representing one school or other of Vaisnavism having Visu, Narayapa, Vasudeva, Bhagavan, as the 
chief deity. These merged later into a single stream 
of thought in which Brahman came to be treated as 
having these appellations. 
The selves, which have been suffering from the 
worldly ills, get encased within such mortal frames 
consistent with the nature of the impressions formed 
by their deeds in earlier births, and take to steps 
to end their sufferings but only with little success. 
They have therefore to turn to the ancient sacred text.s 
24 for solving their problems. 
The Upanisads and the Bhagavad-Gita have taught 
that there are at least three means by which a final 25 solution for release from bondage could be adopted. 
They are karna 
action, inang - Imowledge and 
26 
bhakti - devotion. 
Ramanuja who was inspired 
by the writings of the Alvors and of Yaminscarya 
found out a means in which all these three get 
142 
integrated. According to him, karma stands for the performance of the nitra (daily) and naimitiika (occasional) deeds without aspiring to get the rewards for doing them. This kind of performance 
of duties is considered as an act of worship- 
27 
Aradhana of god. This leads on to the acquisition 
of knowledge of one's own self. In this, karma and 
irana get treated together. 
Human capacities are certainly limited. So 
God's favour is required for this purpose and the 
self is required to adopt the path of devotion. 
This bhakti consists of eight limbs - astanga yoga. 
God deigns to the person who performs this bhakti 
and grants him final release from bondage. 
28 
In spite of the heartening approach to bhaktiyoga 
the fact remains then, that the selves, undertaking 
this means could not complete this yoga in their lifes' time. This yoga may thus be left unfinished 
and will have to be continued in the following birth. Resides, this course is not open to all. Even those, who are ualified to adopt this may not be having 
143 
144 
competence to undertake it and go through the whole oourse. Tempting occurrences hinder the mental balance of these people forcing them either to give up or attend to it with all imperfections, resulting in utter failure. 
It is therefore hazarious for a self to try this rather 
arduous course. Hence the ancient. Acaryas have recommended the path of self surrender (prupatti) or Saranagati. 
29 
This is an easier and surer means as subsidiary to bhakti 
for the latter's effective adoption. Under the influence 
of the Pancuratra Āgamas and Alvars, compartions, the 
Vaispavu Ācārvas have Chalked out self surender (prapatti) 
as an indeperint muns. It is open to all, be it man 
or bird or beast, depending on a devotee's devotion to 
the Lord. This printti dem nds on the part of the self 
utter helplessness and praver to the Lord for salvation 
30 with absolute faith in Him. There fore, it stnds es 
an independent ens for securing moksa. 
Vedāntadesika 
hes dit extensively with printii in his magnum opus 
Palavatriyasera and Nikseni raksa. 
es:es, grit emphasis is laid by great Acaryas like Yamune, Raja and Vedantadesika on the more of life to be practised after a person surrenders himself 
145 
to God - Uttarakṛtyn. One main aspect of the nature of this life is to treat all the selves alike, irrespective of the differences in the physical bodies in which, they are encased. All beings human and non-humans belong to 
the Lord and are not different in their intrinsic nature. 
In particular, the differences based on caste, order 
and sex belong to the physical bodies. They need no 
special attention to discriminate one being from another. 
Of course, 
social status may need some kind of 
difference in treatment to be meted out to others, 
Rut this need not stand in the way of treating all 
selves as devotees of God and one's own self- as a 
devotee of those devotees. It is this aspect of the 
ideal life which Ramanuja preached, that must be treated 
as intended to bring about a healthy and purposeful 
atmosphere, among the followers of Vaispevism. 
The Kavya offers suitable illustrtions 
to 
show the uthor's keen interest in bringing out concepts 
11. these through the incidents, situations, prayers 
and Jo ves trated in this work.NOTES 
1. Raghuv msa, X. 1632; Kumarasambhava, II, 4 -15% 
VI. 15- 
23. 
2. Svetantaropanisad I. 1.6 
prti gatmanam preritaram ca matva 
stestotes mrtattvameti 
Sveto vaturomnared I-1-12 
bhoga bhofyon preritaram ca matve. 
3. Sith prom I-1-0. p.15 of Volume II. Ananda Press 
ECIL n. 
Yo' Vi cetonasya yaar vy-m sarvatmana svartha 
namun dhul yitum ca sukyam taccesataika- 
sv rupum on tat tus Sriram 
Mant- riduriastotram, él.xii 
4. Mant 
ai sabūtu svetassarve hyatmanah paramatmanah 
GI 
5. Brhadarany kon nisad, III, vii.3 
ya urthivym tortaan 
Candogya unanis, Vl. viii.7 
aitadātmyum idaň sarvam 
6. Yaminacarya's Shitraya 
Atmasiddhi, verse 3. 
146 
7. PARA AL. II. 18. 
Batani pararda nitya sutatavikriya 
trip karmiņām utrum prukste rupsmucyate 8. Han, Yuddhunki uge, 117. 81. 25 
9. Cronapad. V.-V 11 7; 11I. 14.13 
19 V 1-611, X. 
10. Cato Unpq. VI. 11. 3 
Talttiriya lam, 1. 1. 4 
1 
11. Chma pisad, VI. 111. 2; 
Brundarapy hopeni, d. 1. iv.7 
12. Tillys did. 1. vii. 1 
13. Vetrasange 1. p. 204 n 
V. 
20% of 
Sr1 b. Vasudev ci riar's edition. 42. 
14. Ibid. p. 214 205 
al 
15. Vi puuriga, 1. 11. 34-/ 
16. Vedart, p. 18 
D. 
Gadyatcaya, Saraghtipidya, 5th sentuce. 
17. Gdy tr yu, Sarpāgstigadya, p. 26–27. 
147 
18. Zaitorīya upeniend. 
19. 
ambasyapare bhuvanesya madye nahasya prste mahato mahiyam. 
Srirangarajastavam of Bhattar, Part Ii, v 
20. Ahirbudhnyasamhita, v.50-57a. 
The Lakshmitantra enumerates 28 scents 11. 19.25 Vedant desika enumerates 36 in Tattvatryacula kа, p. 
214 (Cillarai-Rahasyankal I edition by Sri V.N. 
Sriramadesika Chariar. 
21. Satvatasamhita, 2.7. 
22. Satvatasamhita, 6.22; 
Vispudharmam, 103-16 
23. Vispupurapa, I.8.17 
24. Vedarthasangraha, p.214-218 
25. Bhagavad-Gita, X. 81.10-41. 
26. Yamunacarya's Gitarthasangraha, v.1. 
Purususukta, Nanyapante avannya vidyate. 
27. Yedarthasangraha, p. 255-258 
28. Yogasutra, 
29. Sandily:smrti, 1-15. 
30. Ahirbudhnyasamhita, 52-14. 
148 
CHAPTER VIII 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHILOSOPHY 
149 
A study of this Kivya enables us to form a picture of the author's attempt to give a poetic narration of Kygna's lie with the background of his philosophical ant religius aspirations. Though it is not proper 
and also not possible for an author to find room in a 
poem for discourses on philosophical and religious 
mtters, one can expect the uthor to throw light upon 
or indicate his concepts of religion and philosophy, 
while narrating the incidents in the theme taken up for 
nis v. It is the good luck of the author that Krapa 
bc: me the urro of the poem. Representing the divine 
descent of Vi,pu, Frona is shown to have advised and 
Frenched the Dharmic principles to all those who approached 
him and sought his assist nce for solving their problems. 
It is therefore natural that, imbued with religiosity, 
the author should keep the hero at the highest level 
beyon the influence of the material world. 
There are several incidents in the life of Krypn wher mar culous and subernatural occurrences have taken pice proving beyond coubt that krpa is not merely a man 
150 
of high excellence but God Himself who has come down to earth to save humanity from distress. Narrations of the incidents in the life of the hero do not provide the author with enough cope for conveying his philosophical leanings. 
So the author has utilised many an occasion which made the 
suffering humanity approach Krspa and offer their pravers 
to convey His religious and philosophical beliefs through 
them. The following could be t ken as the prayers addressed 
in the sloka to the Lord on various occasions. 
1. Canto I. 43-64 
2. Canto III. 15-22 
3. Canto VII.93-101 
4. 
Canto IX.32-49) 
59-74 
Gods appeal to Visu in the milky ocean for help to avoid the evils done by certain 
persons on earth. 
Vasudeva's praver to Krspa when the latter presented Himself in full blown divine 
glory. 
Imra's prayer addressed to Krsna when he failed to subdue the cowherdesses. 
Akrura's prayer to Krspa and has soliloouy when he approached Gokula to take Ks and Balarama to Mathura at the bidding of 
Kamsa. 
151 
5. Canto X. 67-83 
IV. 25 
6. Canto XIV. 25-53 
7. Canto XV. 11-28. 
8. Canto XV. 83-93. 
9. Canto XVII.89-128. 
10. Canto XX.77-01. 
Vasudeva's prayer addressed to Krapa out of gretitude for slaying Kamsa. 
Jambeven's prayer addressed to Krypa on his inability to fient with him whom he took, at first, as an intruder into his den. 
Nar-da's praise of Krspa on his approach to him to control Sisupala. 
On hering Bhisma's pr-ise of Krona and on benolding Sahadeva honouring Krsna, Narada danced with joy and uttered words of praise to Krspa. 
Finding him lf frustrated in getting back the Parijata tree from Kapa, Indra offered his words of praise in honour of Krpa's eminence. 
Krona's greatness is admitted 
by 
Sive when he failed to defend bana, his devotee, from Krppa's attack. Thereupon he spoke of Krypa's eminence. 
152 
From a study of the contents of these prayers as presented by the author and also by the author's references to Kropa's greatness in other contexts, it is just possible to have an idea of the ruthor's notions and concepts of the 
system of thought which he was following. It is true that 
all aspects of Ramanuja's philosophy could not be obtained 
from the poem in a connected whole. The study of the 
principles of Ramanuja's system is to be taken up under 
three chief main heading namely, Tattva, Reality, Hita mem s 
for final release and purus arta (mokɛa). Except for 
frequent references to moka as apunarbhava meaning no 
return to the world for another time, the author does 
not deal with the nature of mokea nor the state of the 
souls in mokşa. 
Tattva is only one which is qualified by the 
sentient and the non-sentient. The author finds an 
occasion to depict, this, while describing Krypa se-ted 
The chariot stands in the chariot with Arjuna beyond him. for the body agit, the owner, Arjuna is the soul, and the driver whose main work is to take care of the horses 
(sense organs) so that the chariot may have an orderly 
and regula movement), is Isvara Hims lf. The three could not be treated in themselves except forming part of on- composite whole.1 
The three tattvas art held together by the 
unitary ure of the composite whole, which is 
maintained on the basis of tre-ting God as the soul 
and both the sentient and the non-sentient beings 
as His bory. In other words, Brahman is Sarvasariri, 
the soul of all. The Lord, who was seen in the 
chariot as a driver, with Hims lf, Arjuna and chariot 
forming into a whole, by people who did not then 
require a study of the Upanisad to understand this, 
is described as having the universe as his body. 
This is established through the Vedas. Further 
whichever God a person worships is himself the body 
of Krsna and so worship of that God mounts to worshipping Ana Himself.? 
2 
He has no special, temporal, or objective limitations and in this respect He is equal to Himself and distinct from others. He is present in the milky ocean, the sun's disc and the supreme place, parama pada 
153 
4 
and hence le is called Tridhaman Though He is within and without every object and in every being including 
He is not within the easy reach of them. 
the sages, 
Neither Go s nor demons could behold Him at their 
convenienc 
ང 
The Vedas too touch only the outer 
fringes of His glory.6 
H is the creator of the world, being Himself the instrumental and material cause.7 Creation is 
intended to provide Himself with an occasion to be 
8 
sportive and also to help the selves have their 
physical body to do good deeds for getting rid of 
the sinful effects of past deeds. It is pity (kṛnā) of God that prompts him to create the world.9 Fe 
Himself protects the world which He has created 
to resemble a garden consisting of the sentient 
10 
and the non-sentient beings. None could protect 
nim whom He likes to punish for an offence, nor can 
any one make that person suffer whom He had taken 
to Himself for protection.11 
Pranava extolled in 
the vedas denotes Him nd for all crossing the 
1 
154Doan of Sanaya. He is ever present in the hearts of the yogins to whom He always presents Himself.13 He is 
14 
invincible and hence every other deity who is prominent 
liberation to Him alone. His 
oves his existence and 
15H18 
omnipotence is conveyed by describing Him as capable of 
undoing the world or cre ting it or altering it according to His wish16 
He is identified by the author as the Lord of śrī,17 
(lekmi lakapam;) and is also referred to as having Laksmi and Earth as His consorts. He has no equal, 
18 
nor any one superior to Him either in respect of limits 
19 
or possession of qualities. When this is the case, 
there is no need to compare or contrast any one with 
Him. An attempt to do this would be like camparing a 
mustard with Mount Meru. 
20 
Others are glorified not 
because of their intrinsic worth but because of the 
eminent positions in which they are placed by Him. 
None can face Him. 
22 
21 
Among the five forms which Vigpu takes for the benefit of humanity, it is the descent (avatara) on south that is most captivating to the poets and devotees. The purpose is clearly stated as intending 
155 
to restablish Pharma by relieving the unwanted burden 
23 
of the earth.' His descent takes place out of His 
own free will ind has no bearing on Karma as in the 
24 
case of the birth of the selves." It is his daya, 
compassion for humanity, that prompts him to divide Pimself as Vasudeva, Sankaraña, Pradyumna and Aniruddha 
25 
and also take descents. In this, He is like an actor 
playing several roles at the same time providing immense 
delight to those who are solely attached to Him." 
26 
Though He is equally disposed to Gods and demons, He 
is called the enemy of demons (daityasetru) since He 
has to destroy them who are the enemies of Gods. Yet, 
27 fie has neither a liking for nor anger at them." He 
is well disposed even to those who offend Him but feel 
28 
repentant. He does not make a distinction between 
29 
Gods and others who are lowly placed like cownerdesses. 
He is prompted by daya in treating them alike. 
30 
He is 
verily a sailor who guides the x ark boat across the 
sea taking with Him those who have taken shelter under 
Him. 
31 
The author mentions the other forms namely that of inner controlier, antaryami of the sentient and the non-sentient; thereby He Himself becomes the agent of 
32 
their actions. 
156 
157 
Bhakti is the means for attaining God's help and also attaining Mokga. Invariably one is to be devoted to His feet. This would result in the removal of ignorance of those who are in bondage.33 He acts like a light dispelling darkness with His favour acting like the wick and compassion dava, serving as the oil.34 
meditate upon Him as associated with Laksmi. 
1.35 
While doing Yoga one has to 
The Author frequently refers to reflecting 
upon the various deeds of Krsna which are capable of leading them to final release.36 The principle of 
Tatkratunyaya is shown by the author to have lost its 
validity, since those who recall in their minds the 
binding of Kropa by Yasoda with rope have their bondage 
37 removed. Similarly, Krypa's sports with His own selves, 
38 
the cowherdesses are fit to be mediated upon. Singing 
the glory of the Lord protides the selves with never- failing relish, undecaying elixir and inexhaustible merit. One has to make use of one's senses for the sake of God. The tongue will praise Him, the head shall bow before Him, the two hands will worship Him all these have been 
39 
158 
provided by Him, for man to serve as instruments for 
40 
worship. It is this devotion that made the Lord, whom 
sages have not succeeded in attaining and so are still seeking Him, become an ornament for the Gokula, the habitat of the cowherdesses, solely prompted by their 
devotion to Him. 
41 
The uthor following the tradition of earlier 
teachers of Vaisnavism proclaims self-surrender, Prapatti, 
as a means for moksa and for one's well-being in this 
world. This is considered to be an irreproachable 
sacrifice offered by the devotee with Himself as the 
42 
oblation. God Himself is the upaya (siddhopaya) and so 
he leaves the self to himself. He is the driver taking 
the chariot of the soul's ambition or eagerness (manoraha) 
to which are yoked the horses of Prapatti, the chariot 
43 running fast with speed representing Bhakti. 
It is thus seen that the author had suc essfully 
conveyed, through the various incidents he had handled, the concepts of Ramanuja's Vedanta. Throughout he lays stress on the Sagupa Brahman, Brahman's descent on earth, dava prompting Brahman at every step to offer 
His protection to the selves, His unbreakable bonds 
with animate and inanimate world, inner control over 
the world, and above all the need on the part of the 
self to be devoted to rim with faith and abiding 
interest in seeking Him. Self-surrender is the 
means with which He Himself comes forward to offer 
security and protection for the souls' well-being. 
159 
NOTED 
160 
1. YA, XXIII. 21 to 23 
2. Ibid, VI.3; cf. gīta. ch.VII.21, 22 and IX.23. 
3. Ibid, 1.55, XVI.115. 
4. Ibid, 1.43, X11.4, XX.79. 
5. Ibi, XIV. 37 
6. Ibid, XVII, 110, IX.68. 
7. Ibid. XVII.104; creation here is uncovering what 
is hidden. Note the word udanilavat used by the 
author. I.9. 
8. Ibid. 1.50; XVI.117. 
9. Ibid. 1.9; XX.79. and the commentary thereon. 
10. Ibid. XVI.116. 
11. Ibid. XVI.121; XIV.39. 
12. Ibid. 1.59; Cr. Gita XVII.23. 
13. Ibid. VII.2. 
14. Ibid. XVII.91. 
h 
15. Ibid. XVII.94; ef: Brahmasutra, Yavadathikaramavastatiḥ 
à dikarikanam III.3.31. 
16. Toid. I.56; XVI.115. 
17. Ibid. XVI.115. 
18. X, XX.86; IX.34, 45. 
14. 112, XVII.101; IX.61; XIV.37 
20. d, XV1J. 102. 
21. Li, XVII. 94. 
22. 1d. XVIT. 05; cf: Ramayana Sundarakanda 
rahma svayambuh'. 
23. Irid. XX.84; cf: Bhagavad Gita, Ch.IV.8. 
24. d, XX.79; XIV.32, IV,24. 
25. 10. 1.45. 
d. 
26. id. I.49; XIV.35. 
27 Ibad. XVI1.119; XV.20. 
28. Lin. VII.4. 
29. 18. XV./0; vide: $itante stotra 
samanyamadhidaivatam. 
30. id. VII. 97. 
31. vid. 1.81, IX.60. 
32. Inic. XVII.108. 
33. ic. XVII.100; X.74. 
34. 
c. X.70 
35. . IX.61. 
36. 
d. AVAL.107, IV.4; (skaying of putana is 
in point μ) 
161 
162 
37. XA. IV.35. 
38. Ib. IV.101; of: Bhagavatam, X.33-37. 
39. Id, X.69. cf: Bhagavatam, X.33.37. 
40. Ib d. XV.70; cf: Mukundamala. V.Poigai Azwer. 1.11 
41. g. 11.61 
To 
42. In d. XV.23; 1.43. 
43. 
In_d. X.75. 
OHAPTER - D 
COMMENTATOR 
COMMENTATOR 
While there were hosts of poets, few among them alone had their compositions commented by scholars of 
later days, particularly about 9th century. This was 
not motivated by the poems presenting problems of 
passages terein being ununde standable. There arose 
a tendency among scholars to offer their own inter- 
pretations to the passages in the poems, at times to 
controvert the comments of other scholars on them. 
The result of this tendency is that even great scholars 
who were noets and scholars of high order chose to 
comment uron the noems of ancient writers. 
Some scholars 
showed off their pedantry leaving no explanation worth 
the nume for the passages. 
It thus we find the come.it itors leaving off 
what is hard for compretension, sometimes declaring 
that the mann is cler in import and ving 
e'sbor tely the compound for tions when are unnecessary 
This which re vry clear requiring 
in some c 38. 
no coment are so es explined in a way er ting 
confusion to rulers by introducing unwint d and 
Purpose.e.s tours. 
163164 
Bhoja's remark on this runs thus: 
durbodham yad atīva tad vijahāti spasṭārtham 
ityuktibhip 
spagtarthegvativistṛtam vidadhati vyarthais 
sanasadikaib 
asthane 'anupayogibhisca bahubhir jalpair bhramam 
tan te 
1 
śrotrpamiti vastuviplavakṛtaḥ sarve'pi 
tīkākṛtab 
1 
This criticism does not apply to all commentabies 
since some writers of commentaries have been very faithful 
in bringing out the author's import intended by him in his 
writing. 
Commentaries are of different kinds according to 
their names like Bhasya, Vartika, Vrtti, Vyakhyā, Ţikā, 
eto. The generally accepted definition is: 
padacchedah padarthoktirvigraho vakyayojana akgepo'tha samadhanam vyakhyanam pancalakşapam 
2 
According to this, a commentary should contain five aspects: splitting the passage into component parts words, meaning of the words, splitting of the compounds, application of the component parts to form 
0 
165 
sentences, and answering the objections that could possibly be raised. 
Appaya Diksita, the commentator of the Yadav bhyudara was patronized by Timmaraja, one of the successors of the 
kings of Vijayanagar. He enjoyed royal patronage under Venkatapatiraya (1585 to 1614), the son of Timmaraya. It appears that Diksita wrote the commentary on 
Yadavabhyudaya under the direction of his patron 
Timmaraya, who became aware of the excellence of the 
Yadavabhyudaya from the scholars of his court. As this 
kavya was not commented upon before, Appaya Dikgita was 
entrusted with the task of writing the commentary. That 
Appaya Diksita was eminently qualified to comment upon 
any work is evident from his vast equipment in the 
study of several subjects. 
Appaya Diksita mentions the name of the author of the Yadavabhyudaya as Kavitarkikasimha and he would therefore explain it according to his own powers of understanding out of deference to the wishes of his patron. The citations in this commentary are profuse. He must have written a small work or at least some lokas 
166 
3 
in praise of his patron, Venkatapati; as some slokas 
cited 
here his patron's name occurs, These are 
found in his commentary upon his own stotra, Varadarajastava written in emulation of Vedanta Desika's Var-darajapancasat. 
There are two ways in which attempts are made to explain passages: one is the Mimanca method; according 
to which, he verb is taken first followed by the words 
connected with it. This method is found in the commentary 
of Marayap on Naisach cerita. The other method is 
token up by the Nadyayakas, which takes up the subject 
matter at first for explanation. 
He follows the Miyayika method of commenting in 
his exposition of Yod v bnyucity. The commentary on 
the first nine Solas in C nto I are very elaborate following the Purplek the Paradararurana. He 
goes here beyond the rules laid down in this purana. 
He thes up not only every word for explanation, but goes on to justify the usages by citing the lexicons, Come of which are not extent. The rules of grammar are 
pressed into serv ce while deciding the accurate use of 
certain expressions. 
167 
He reveals his best talents in deciding the kind of figure of speech applicable to certain lokas, and also the meaning througn suggestion for certain slokas. 
He offers bief explanations for the subsequent lokas following the method adopted by earlier commentators for the kavyas. It is worthy to note, he observes, that 
even in the graceful poems of Kavitarikasimha, purports 
are to be found for each word. 
t 
ithan vicintyah sarvatra bharap santi pade-pade 
L 
kavitkarkikasimhasya karyesu lalithisvapi (YA.1.9) 
Appaya Diksita's commentary is available for the 
entire text of the Yadavabhyudaya, excepting for the 
Sloka 64 in Canto XIX. His commentary begins with the 
giving of meanings of the words denoting the subject 
with the relevant quotations in support of those meanings. Invariably, discussions are there for the grammatical formations, lexicographical references and the rhetorical soundness for the figures of speech and rasa. Besides, brief and clear expositions are given for contents of the slokas. 
168 
Among the several glokas for which his elucidations are valuable, the following slokas may be referred to, 
7 
along with his commentary. While describing the pregnant condition of Devaki, the author of the poem fancies that the night and Devaki worked hand in hand for dispelling 
darkness. Here the word "sva madhyasarpannavisud hadhama" 
is used to mean the night whose brilliance was clear at 
midnight, and as Devaki having the lustrous luminary, 
namely, Got within herself. An objection is noted between 
the night and Devaki having only similarity and there is 
no room for poetic fancy (ubpreksa). The commentator 
contends that this compound is applicable to both, but 
the word madhya, visuddha and dhama have different meanings, 
namely midnight, bright and clear white, and brilliant 
moonlight as applied to night, the middle portion of the body, spotless purity and an effulgent figure (Krspa) In the case of Devaki. Thus there is no common feature 
to suggest that there is similarity between the two. On the other hand, these three words which have double meanings help in the rise of poetic fancy (utpreksa). 
the 
In another gloka the moon which arose then is described to resemble a white lotus-like forehead of 
8 
the night. The black spot in the moon was the ornamental wark in the fese of that woman, namely night. An objection squid be noticed here on the ground that the moon was in ne a ghth phr se of the black fortnight and so cannot be the full moon Diksita observes that it is a small 
matter which ould be ignored. He cites a passage from Sisupalavadha An alternative explanation is offered by 
nim according to which the word bimba in sudhamsubimba 
must be taker. simply to be refer to a part of the body. 
Se this word can be taken as meaning a part of the face 
viz., forehead. 
9 
Objections are often raised regarding Krapa's 
close movements with the cowherdesses questioning his 
morality. In this connection the poet uses the word 
Diksita brushes aside this objection 
Tavavauvanens. 
by suggesting that youth (yaura) means the completion of childhood, which ends with the fifth year of a person. This suggests that beyond the fifth year one behaves 
like a youth. 
Krspa was only seven years old when he lifted up Govardhana hill. After killing Kamsa, Balarama and Krapa had their upanayana and study under Sandipani. 
169 
- 
1# -* saensis 
... 
' 
Max 
Vutral Tics. 
34 
12 of 18 end 6. 137: 
4 
AL 
171 
الرسمية 
* w 
V 
by which 
.... by Himself. 
peple trou 
* LAKE 202 
3 
- 
- index: iz 
- 
Die Tersi 
of 
Bie ow self, 
_cat_ng 
for 
ICO.TRANSL.cat ng that 
t15 word! He Co $10.0 *** 2 
dad.ting vod as back eriment use.. 
IS GU DR not ar road 
Endless p 
for bus -TES is vo.la no 
1 
ught them the meana 
any motive, as other. 
aot be justified 
gett nok. Su aloes neiesse then W.LUET 
-tir: LATIOUS COuld 
be expa car com xind of weans 
to be axen up by the solved, e 
+ 
s no room is charge 
VALSAsya and 
im as tainted by partially a crucity 
nairgkruva. 
16 
While describing the "adehors, the author 
Mentions that the Divine Couple looked at each other with a smile, in order to offer what others would 
expect of them, that is, everybody expects that the couple should have long life. When they are eternal, there is no need for the bride to wish for her husband long life. Dikita quotes the mantra and explains it 
further. 
1' 
172 
Krsna felt that Garuda was his own life external 
to his body. The author uses the word prana in singular. Normally, he word prapa ir taken to be plural in number. Dikita remarks that the word prana is a particular kind of air and not the five kinds which serve diferent 
purposes. Diksita gives here and there some information regarding his study and understanding of words. 
18 
While interpreting XIV.4 on the Syamantaka jewel the commentator reproduces in his own words the story of syamantaka and observes at the end that several contradiction and omissions among the incidents in the sources of this story are condensed in one sloka by the author Vedanta Desika. 
19 
According to Apmaya Digita, Vedanta Desika himself comented on Yacovabhyalaya. 
173 
videt evam kvɛcinulakosa eva vyaknyānāṁ dream 
asya sickasyapathakuddberatyntadurniscayatayā 
srotspa anugrahaya prayah kovinaiva vyakhyatam śrot♪pāmamugrahāya 
tatra ga kalyapaviharayop' iti dhatup praiddha 
dhatupa hated ttydigu na drap. tathñol dhātupā hatedṛtiyādīgu 
Sistovy vahārādadaraplyap 
(Comment ry under IA.VI.68) 
The commentator offers then his own interpretation 
for this gloke V1.68 and adds another interpretation of 
is own as an alternation. 
Another instance is 'irtham kvacinilaslok evяsya 
Lokasya vyaki yanam drstam'. The commuter offe's there 
is own interpretation (YA.VI.06). 
Gods appropened Kspa when he was fighting with 
Indra for taking away the Parijata tree. They approached 
the Lord who was of inexhaustible lustre like the sun, 
themselves being pl neus and constelations. So when 
compared to the sun, they are non-existent in his presence. The author uses the word durgrahadasa to denote this 
condition. The commentator says that Rahu and Ketu are 
meant here, because they are not visible except duringagainst Indra and Bapa or even sisupala, there is no powerful display of fury on His part. 
The author says Krspa and Balarama appeared 
26 
as two prominent rasas while entering Mathura. 
The commentator notes that the two rasas are vira and Adbhuta. He adds that though Śrngara is the 
only sentiment that is said to be helpful or favourable 
to its development. Hasya alone can be grouped with Śrngara. Therefore vira and adbhuta which are of 
favourable kind are to be admitted here. 
Digita, who had deeply studied and made 
substantial contribution to Alankara, discusses 
the identity of figures of speech in his commentary 
The author describes that the lotuses are imagined 
to have blossomed at night. Questioning how it could be, Dikşita refers to the view of Darin, who admits this aspect of nature. Dandin writes that 
27 when there is moonlight, lilies do not blossom. The 
author of Sahityacintamani, Viranarayapa writes that lilies bloom only during night. So the convention noted by the two rhetoricians will have to be admitted. 
175 
The commentator notes Utpreksa as a figure of speech in Canto II.65. Here the word iizava is used by the poet. So this form cannot denote Utpreksa and can be taken as Utpreksa based on Upama, since the 
word sagaramula pankam is not a case of well-known 
upamana; since the moon's disc is not known to be 
reflected. So this is a clear case of utpreksa. 
Diksita's commentary has profuse citations 
from works of various kinds and subjects. Primarily 
he cites from Vedas, 
which are recited 
during marriage rituals. He quotes from Upanisads 
like Katha and the Taitthiriva. Among the works 
on epics and Puranas, Bhagavata, Kummapurana, Vispupurana Vavariyapurana, Narasimhapurana, Mahabharata, Harivansa 
and Ramayana deserve mention. 
The authorities cited by the commentator from works on grammar, alankara and lexicon are too numerous to note them. Therefore single inst ince is alone taken for each among most of these citations of works and 
authors. 
176 
Among the Kavyas, the following works are mentioned or passages cited from there without mentioning the source: 
Sisupalavacha of Magha 
Commentary under loka 
II.80; XV.2 
Balaramayara (drama) of 
Rajasekhara 
kadambari (prose) of Bana 
Vasavadatta (prose) of Subandhu 
Yamakaratnākara of Srivatsanka- 
miśra 
Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa 
X.61 
XII.38; VIII. 16 & 17 
XX.50; XVI.143 
I.1000 
XIII.72 
Kumarasambhava of Kalidasa 
VII.24 
Vepisamhara of Bhattanarayapa 
Laksmisataka (author not known) 
Laksmitantra 
Ta 
XIII.30 
XVIII.1 
XII. 3 
Särikasutra 
XV. 24 
Bhagavat Sastra 
XIV.75 
Anargaraghava of Murari 
XXI.63 
Kirātārjuniya of Bhar vi 
XIII.108 
h 
Naigadam of Srihargşa 
XXII.197 
Ehaṭṭivyam - Rīvannvata of Bhatti II.44 
Cakravartha a commentator on 
Raghuvansa is mentioned in 
IV.124 
177 
The following works are mentioned in the field 
of Alankara! 
1. Vamana's Kawalankara Sutra with Vrtti 
2. Bhavaprakasana of Saradatanaya 
IV.120 
3. KAzyaprakasa of Mammata 
I.12, 38 
4. Candraloka of Jayadeva 
XVII.36 
5. Alankara Sarvasva of Ruyyaka 
II. 43 
II. 11 
6. Érngaraprakasa of Bhoja 
7. Sahityacintamani of Viranarayana II. 48 
8. Kavyadarsa of Dapdin 
There are references to a commentary on Dangints 
Kavzīdarśa which is not now identifiable II.48. 
Rasarmava probably Rasarnavasuddhakara of Singabhupala. 
Several works on lexicography are cited. Some 
of them are: 
1. Namalingamusasana of Amarasimha 
III.13 
2. Amarakosavvakhva 
t 
3. Amarasesa of Purusothamadeva 4. Koiratarangini of Kşīra svimin 
5. Vaijayanti of Yadavaprakasa 
I. 63 
III.49 
I. 14, 49 
178 
6. Vióvaprakāśa of Maheswara 
X. 10 
7. Ratnamalā 
1.46; III.66; 
IV.54 
Nanartharatnama of Irugappa 
dandenatha 
VI.27 
III. 66 
9. Rudranighantu 
10. Alavakosa of Ajayapala 
11. Abhidhanaratnamala of Halayudha 
12. Śabdarpava 
13. Yadava 
VII.18 
III.5, 38; IV.43 
IV.15 
14. Nānārttarnavasanksens of Kesava XIII.104. 
15. Bhatta Bapa's lexicon 
16. Ramadasa's lexicon 
17. Subuticandra 
h 
XI.24 
XVIII.105 
XII.11; 1.25 
18. Dhananjaya the author of Nigaptu IV. 41 
19. Samaya 
20. RabhasA 
21. Sarvananda, commentator of 
Amarakosa 
VII.16 
X. 39 
XV. 133 
Among other works and authors, the following 
deserve mention. 
179 
1. Sangitaratnakara of Sarngadeva 
II.93; 1.7; IV.120 
2. Sangita Sudhanichi 
VIII. 54 
3. Sanzīta Sudhakara of Haripala 
4. Sanzīta Ratnāvali 
XVII. 21 
These belong to the field of music and dance. 
There are works of standard writers quoted 
from the field of grammar. 
Among them are: 
Atre 
Sakatavana 
h 
Dăturṛttikära 
Kaiyata, the commentator on 
Mahabharya. 
Haradatta's Padamaniari 
Kasika Ertti 
I. 100 
I. 37 
III. 49 
XII. 2 
II. 11 
IV. 8 
Subhuticandra, commentator on 
Amarakosa 
XX. 50; I. 25 
Kvāsakāra was Jinendrabuddhi, author of Hyäa, 
■ commentary on Kasıkarttı. 
Sabda prakasika of Bhoja 
Bunitikirti, the author of 
a Vrtti 
Bandaratnakara of Vamanabhaṭṭa- 
II. 8 
I. 39; II:11 
bapa 
VIII. 12 
Karikal padruns of Bhopadeva 
180 
There are references to: 
Kamandaki's Nitisara 
XXI.28 
Galasasta 
XII. 51 
Vastushatra 
Susrata, author of Susrutasamhita IV. 119 
Bharavatcchastra - Pancaratra Agama 
Purvaminamsasutra 
Ratnasa tra 
Brha-ataka, a work of Varahamihira 
Yogas stra 
on astronomy 
II. 96 
XV. 106 
There are several expressions which require 
elucidations and justification from the field 
of grammar. Some of them are on the correctness 
of the word. 
Caubria 
Devaki 
Un korva 
Atina 
III.36 
I. 100 
VIII.19 
VIII.78 in 
Instrumental case but treated as indeclinable in 
Some case. 
Sitrita 
Avor vitnena 
X.66 
XI. 51 
181 
Suvarnavalli 
Sadysva 
R 
Sibara 
Yadava 
Yauvana and Yavata 
Puspavantan 
XIII. 65 
II. 73 
III. 
XV. 31 
IV. 50; XVI.141 
X. 5 
Tandri 
XIX. 4 
Kadanganya 
XXII. 9. 
Bhutalerte 
XIV. 33 
Sahaiharmacari 
XV. 26 
Asesatab 
XVII. 106 
Vairatri'cam 
XIX. 59 
Smaraianakatany 
XXIV. 58 
Brndavana 
IV. 39 
There are several words for which the author offers 
meanings citing relevant sources. Most of these words 
are not of ordinary occurrence though they are confined 
only to the lexicon. 
Such words are: 
adrechava means sveccaya 
according to Kesava 
Zataka 
II. 25 
I. 19 
182 
Kaladhauta which Dīksita taks in 
the sense of silver 
II. 4 
Laksa mans semblance 
II. 43 
Distinction between Papdara and 
Papdura. Pandara - white 
II. 50 
Pandura 
yellow 
Kunda 
11. 63 
dara 
means Mahan 
II. 68 
Κτήση 
III. 12 
Kanduka with voiced dental sound 
III. 49 
Nara 
IV. 116 
Akan 
VI. 33 
Todaka 
VI. 49 
VI. 20 
cruma 
VIII. 92 
Arvacata 
XI. 45 
Ar 
XIV. 67 
Padat 
XV. 40 
Varsa 
XIX. 4 
Arer un 
كنة 
Mip prasu 
XX. 1 
XXII. 169 
XXII. 199 
183 
The fact that the Kuvalavananda is based on the fifth chapter of Candraloka omitting Sabdalankaras, shows that Dīkṣita was not an admirer of sabdacitra or amprasa. 
Yet, his comments, on the sixth canto of the Kavya, 
reveals his amazing acquaintance with the sabdacitra 
in all its varieties. 
The colophon at the end of Canto I should have 
been part and parcel of the poem during his days. His 
interpretation of colophon reveals that Desika was a 
lion (simha) as causing dread to poets and logicians. 
Several systems of thought are included under 
the name tantra apart from the six systems of thought Saiva and Vaispava. Agamas are also added. The word 
Svantantra is interpreted as ability to establish or refute any matter from his own standpoint. The title Vedantacava is aptly shown to mean an instructor 
of the secret matters of Vedanta. 
With an unmatched skill and unique equipment 
30 
and training in several systems of thought and subjecta of study, Dikşita has proved himself to be well-fitted 
185for interpreting the passages of the text of the Yadavabhrudays. Not only does he closely follow the primary motive of Desika in writing this work but 
also reveals his acquaintance with the doctrines of 
Vaipavisa. Only in one instance does Digita 
reveal his Advaitic leanings. 
It is needless to remark and observe that the 
Yadavabhyudaya would have been a sealed book for most of the scholars, but for Digita's valuable and 
purposeful commentary upon it. 
186 
NOTES 
187 
1. 
Pataniala Yorasutra, Bhojavṛtti, Introductory Śloka.6 
2. Narakosa.p. 828 
Bhasa sutrartho varnyate yena padaiþ sutrāmisaríbhiḥ 
svapadani ca varnyante basyam başyavido viduḥ 
(Nyavakosa. p.627) 
Vartikan: uktamuktaduruktänam cinta yatra pravartatë 
tam grantham varttikam prahurvarttigajnā- 
manişinah (Ibid. 741) 
Vrtti: It is only an explanation of the original 
passage. 
Yakborn: See below in the text. 
Tilka: 
moolagranthasya appratipattivipratipattyanyathe- 
pratipattinivaranene tat karturabhipretärthasya fabdantarekavivaranam (Nyavakosa. p.306) 
3. Vide: Appayadikita's comment ry under YA 
verses 10 to 13. 
Introductory 
For further details refer to Sri N.V.P.Unnithiri's 
article on 'Commentarial Literature in Sanskrit' in Dr E. Kunjunni Raja's Comemoration Volume P. 572 to 550 published by the Adyar Library and Research Centre, 
Nadras. 
Appayad kita wrote more than one hundred works. Of these there are three on Alankara, eight Kavyas, four Kosas, twenty nine stotras, seven on Mimansa, three on Dvaita, four on Visistadvaita, twenty six on Sarvasiddhanta, ten on Advaita, six on Vyakarana, one each in Purana, Dharmasastra, mantra and tantra. 
Vide. Appayadiksita's commentary under IA, I.9. p.11 
Vide. Yaradarajastavam commentary Ś1.6. 
ratnastambesusankrantthaip pratibimbasatairvṛttaþ 
Jnatab kathancana raya sabnayan venkataprabhup 
kelitalpam bhurobhahusikari venkata prabhop 
(Varadarajastavan. $1.106) 
The latter reference is given as an instance of 
Hetvalankara. This is not found in the Kuvalavananda It is not known clearly why Hetvalankara is mentioned here. It is not improbable that Diksita wrote one work on alankara of the Yasobhusana kind like 
Vidyanatha's Prataparudring. 
4. II. 73 and 80 
188 
189 
8. A. 11. 73; Saíupalavadha. XI. 41 
9. YA. II. 80 
10. Vide: Appaya Diksita's commentary under IA, IV.50. 
p. 14. The other reading for navayauvanena is Vayas naven. The word Yayasa is taken in the sense 
of youthfulness. Then the fresh on set of youthfulness 
is meant here. 
vayupsabdena yauvanam vivaksitam' 
11. XA. IV. 64 
12. Bhagavata X. 33-26 
13. Vide Commentary under YA. 50; Padmotarapurapa, 
Anandasrama edition, Poona, Adhy. 272. $1s. 177 to 179. 
14. YA. VIII. 68 
15. Bhartan, X. 33-37 
anu;ratraya a bhutanam manusam dehamisthitaḥ 
bnuja te tudrsih krīda yah sytra tat parobhavet. 
Br132sutra. 2-1-34 
16. 
YA. I. 9; 
17. 
IFC. XIII. 86. 
18. 
d. VII. 2. 
CHAPTER - X 
CONCLUSION 
CONCLUSION 
The Yidavabhyudaya is a valuable contribution made by Vedinta Desika to Sanskrit Literature in the background of philosophical and religious aspects of Vaisnavism. Among his literary works, the important ones are Ya lavabhyudaya, Hamsasandesa and Sankalpa- 
suryodaya. Besides, there are devotional lyrics 
which include Padukasahasra. Whether Padukasanasra 
is a kavva or stotra cannot be easily determined. 
That it contains marvellous flights of poetic fancy 
cannot be cenied. Yet it does not reveal the main 
characteristic features of a Kavya belonging to the 
Sreebantha type. There is one more work called 
Subhasitanivi, which is didactic in nature. 
Among the Sanskrit poets, it is invariably 
found that those who composed fine poems and dramas did not write prose and Campu. For instance, Kalidasa, khavabnuti, King harga and others had their reputation through their Mahakavyas or dramas, or both. Those w..o won unique repute as prose writers like Bapa, Subandhu and Dapdin, and the Campu writers like 
191 
Trivikrama bhatta, Somadevasuri, Bhoja and Venkatadhvarin did not make their name by composing Mahakavyas. Solitary exceptions are there like Kilakaptha Diksita, who wrote kaya and camni. Vedanta Desika follows the tradition of Kalidasa and other eminent poets and did not write works of the Gadya and Campu kind. 
It is hard to find out the circumstances that 
made the author compose this poem, or as a matter of 
fact the drama and the lyrics as well. However, the 
Guruparamparas and the stotras in praise of Vedanta 
Desika do narrate the circumstances for some of those 
compositions. 
ons.1 
2 
Mahacarya (Doddayacarya) refers in his Vedanta - 
desikavaibhavaprakasika that Desika won in a wager, Dindima Sarvabhauma and wrote Krspabhyudaya, which is to be taken as not different from Yadavabhyudaya. Chetlur Narasimhachariar writes, in his Desika and His Works, that Dipdima, the poet, wrote a work called Raghavabhyudaya and challenged Desika to compete with 
192 
him by producing another poem superior to his. Re adds furt: er that Dipdimakavi wrote Saluvabhyudaya 
which might have been mistaken by later writers for 
Raghyabhyudaya. However, this contention cannot 
stand because of the following grounds. Arunagirinatha 
(1422-50), son of Rajanatha, had the name Dindimakavi 
Sarvabhauma. His son, Rajanatha II wrote Saluvabhyuda.za; 
Saluvanarasimha (1450-1491) is said to have written 
4 
a Ramabhyudaya. From this it is clear, that Vedanta 
Desika who preceded Arunagirinatha, Rajanatha, 
Saluvanarasimha by, at least, more than half a century 
could not have met these writers and composed this 
poem to rival them. 
In all these records as they are available from the Guruparampara and allied works, there is the element on the part of the authors of these works, for appreci- ation, admiration and eulogy to speak in praise of Vedantadesika's eminence. Though these records cannot prove beyond doubt that the aut or wrote them in these circumstances, it must be admitted that these literary productions of Vedant desika are great masterpieces 
193 
and do no require much of these narrations by the admirers, as they stand with pri ne glory, the 
tests of any critic, whatsoever. 
را 
Prativadibhayankaram Annan (C.1200 A.D), a disciple of Kumar varadacarya, son of Vedantadesika composed 70 Slokas entitled 'Saptatiratnamalika in praise of Vedantad sika in which he offers his due praise for 
Desika's eminence. 
He writes: 
194 
ananyasadharapacaturi ca kavyad gu 
brahmavidagrapis tvan (Saptatiratnamalika, 
81.44) 
which means his skill in literary compositions is 
not shared by any other writer. In composing Sanskrit 
verses, he is a close follower of Farasarabhatta, son of Srivatsanka Misra the disciple of Ramanuja. 
yassamskṛtakavitayam praughinnanveti 
kuranathasutam (Saptatiratnamalika. 19a) 
Vedantadesika had to his credit three enviable 
titles namely Kavitarkikasimha, Sarvatantrasvatantra and Vedantacarya. It is not exactly known where and 
195 
1 
when he was awarded the title the Kavitarkikas in From the last sloka of the Hayagrivastotra, where the word, Kavitarikakakesarina occurs, it may be presumed that he had this title before composing this stotra. Scholars do not agree as to the time 
when this stotra was composed. While it is held by 
some that this is the first composition of the author 
when Lord Hayagriva appeared before him at Tiruvahindra- 
puram, others hold that it was composed at Tiruvahindra- 
place.5 
puram on his second visit to this place. However it 
would be wise to admit that Desika might have written some poems and certain works on Sastras earlier, while be was at Kanci or elsewhere, before he wrote the 
Hayagriva stotra. 
Regarding the other two titles, it is clear that the God and Goddesses at Srirangam conferred them on the Acarya during his stay there, for his contributions The titles Vedantacarya was conferred on him by God sriranganatha for his composition Satadusani and Sarvatantrasvatantra by Goddess Sriranganayika for his skill in several arts and 
subjects.From the commentary of Appays Digita on the colophon or curring at the end of the first canto of Yadavebhyur aya, it is understood that Arpaya Digita was well & are of Desika's eminence to deserve these 
titles. 
The traditional scholars are of the opinion, that Vedaradesika did not owe anything by way of 
inspiration to the great ports like Kalidasa and 
others. Further, they try to renresent the contrast 
between th writings of ancient poets and those of 
Vedantadesika. This seems to be not really warranted. 
For Desika had no rivalry with any carva and poet. 
He too snould have had eauc tor and training through 
a study of the works of earlier writers. Since his 
aim was to preach the doctrine of Ramanuja's system 
of philosophy, in a variety of ways including literary compositions, he had to write following the pattern that was available then in the works of ancient writers. It is in this sense that we find the Yadavabhyudaya taken up by the author. It is really on the lines of Reghuvamsa of Kalidasa, though not in imitation. It is 
1.96 
197 
• 
needless have an e 
• 130 Sur er wild the contrast 
between tin two po me. V. e 7.adana realt with a 
number of princes of Raghu dyny, the autor confined 
4 
Yadu 
msrift or member of tau cynst", mely Krsna, 
the Yadus artha. In th 
I 
e way, one to find 
justific on for the writ of Enmensony cda and 
2 
Sankalpesi ryodaya. Aturnst, in theater, one can 
find the uthor's interior o la tue doctrines 
of Advait: as they were cosplayed in the Prabodhacand rod ya. 
The sareannot be sad in the use of Hansrsandera which, 
hough written in lation of Yernagindesa, is grand in 
L 
onception serving a cifferent rese. 
The author remas at the hearing of this 
Mahakavya that he owed the th me to the abn rata, 
" 
which he calls as lys i campor.rs that, 
while there are two eminent poet Vanti ar Vyasa, 
other poets began trying her him in alterary compositions without the last sense of shame, knowing that they are not equal to the.e two eminent writers. 
Vasudha srotraje turmin vyas, ca haya thite 
anyepi havaya er bibliver optrarã (YA.1.4) 
F 
198 
From this, it must not be construed that the author did not receive any inspiration from the writings of other ancient poets. A close study of the Yadavabhyudaya along with Kalidasa's Raghuvansa and Kumarasambhava and Magha's Sisupalavadha, proves that these two early writers 
had made deep impressions on the author through their 
writings. Again the profound influence exerted by Valmiki 
and Vyasa is also present. 
Certain expresssions and usages bear ample 
testimony to this influence of Valmiki. 
paribabhuva cukopa visişmiye 
parijahasa harim prajagerja ca/ 
paripatena bhavanteravasana 
1 
graha gupena bhajan bhevitavyatām 
asphotayamasa cucumba puccam 
nananda cikriga Jugnu jagama. 
stambhānarohannipapāta bhūmau 
(YA.III.58) 
8 
ničarśayan svām praktim kapinam (Ramayana, 
Sundarakanda. X.54) 
Here we find that the first half of the sloka 
describing the attitude of Kamsa in despair contains 
199 
only the verbal forms as expressed by Valmiki in the movements of Hanuman in elation. 
While describing the greatness of God as hard to be comprehended even by the Vedas, the author says that the travellers called Vedas go away from their homes to find 
out God's greatness and come back in the evening without 
achieving their purpose. 
of: 
amitasya mahimnaste prayatum paramicchatam 
vitatha vedapanthanam yatrasayangtha gatib (IA.1.47) 
bhavayannatmanatmanam yatra sayamgrho muniḥ 
narajaka janapade yogakşemah pravartate (Ramayana, 
Similarly Vyasa's expressions 
Ayodhyakanda 67.23) 
found handled 
by the author in a slightly different way. 
The following gloka-s of Vyasa could be studied 
along with those of the author. 
yo'nyatha sant matmanamanyathā pratipadyate 
kim tena krtam papam corepat mapahariņā 
(Mahabharata, 
Udyogaparva 42-35) 
200 
The soul is the property of the Lord which the self considers as his own property. This is indeed a theft- 
a transgresion. 
The au hor gives expression to this idea present in 
the Mahabharata in the following verse. 
papmanam tamasi patayitmam atma couryamadhi- 
rajapudastham/ 
coditena niyatopi hrtatma corada amavasadu- 
payati 
(YA. XXI. 20) 
Again it is stated in the Mahabharata that the 
Vedavyasa was but the Avatara of the Lord. 
verse: 
kyspadvaipayanam vyasam viddhi narayapam prabhum ko hyanyaḥ puparikaksat mahabharatakṛt bhavet 
(Mahabharata Santiparra 356-11) 
This author expresses this idea in the following 
vibhakta samanya visesadharma pradurbhabuvopanisat 
prabhorya/ 
Sa 
eva tam vyasa munis samīcīm paryagrahīdbharata 
vedavakta// (YA,¿8 31) 
201 
In the Bhagavata it is said that Uddhata, on seeing the intense devotion which the Gopis had for Krspa, observed that he should have been like a grain of sand or a creeper in Brndavana to have had the imprints 
of the Lord and his devotees. 
asamaho carana repu jugamaham syam 
vrndavane kimapi gulmalatausadhinam (Bhagavata X.47-60a) 
The author expresses this here: 
yat padapankaja paragajuşam sasamsub 
jarmatutam jagati gulmalat adhikanam (. XXIV. 81b) 
gulmalatādhikānām 
There are several inst inces which show Kalidasa's 
influence on the author. 
(1) Speaking on the merits of a Kavya, Kalidasa says 
in his Malavikagnimitra:- 
Neither priority in point of time nor the 
occurrence later, indicates either the merit. 
of a Kavva or its defect. 
The wise choose 
well, while the ignorant is led by the nose. 
purapanityeva na sadhubarvan na capi kavyam navamityavadyam/ santap parikyanyataradbhajante 
madhab parapratyayane yabuddhip// 
(Malavikagnimitra 1.2) 
The author presents a similar idea in the Karva: 
tadatve mutanam survamayatyanca puratanam 
na dogayaitadubhayam na gunaya ca kalpate (YA.1.6) 
(2) During the march of Raghu the women-folk who kept 
watch over the fields sang the glory of Raghu, who became 
their protector. 
ikṣucchayanişādinyastasya gopturgupodayam 
akumarakathod dhanam saligopyo jaguryasap 
(Raghuvamsa IV.20) 
The author says, that the cowherdesses glorified 
in their songs, the merits of Krspa. 
viharagopasya gupẩn gradbhiḥ 
kṣībāśayā gītapadairudāraiḥ/ 
cakasurasadi (sire sadhi) tabhakti bhedab 
samopasakha iva saligopyab//(YA.V.57) 
It may be noted that the word Saligopyah is present 
in both. 
202 
(3), who we d 
12dding of Ram, red v 
Fursri. 1-re 
Link a. the 
ve the pin 
Tri 
* OF W 
3 
. 
to deset be the bei 
" 
} 
C 
• 
- when 
spat Gokulf for Methet. 
Entions the wat 
Kupi, w 
tic myorg also 
thir: be 
1ment -tion of gas of the fl of 17ga. 
s`muktskaptham vacunāt.btārīt 
c. kranda vfur riv buy aghuvansa XIV.68) 
{ 
kurarīkūjit, sucuk sv th 
YA. IX.17) 
203 
kurarys ive cupkiärtë bagpan räknekṣaṇāḥ 
(Ramayana, Twichanda, 113.26) 
(4) At the advent of spring, the cuckoo utters 
A sweet note with its ton nude sweet. by taking 
in the shoots of the mango. 
cutankurasvadelegayakanthap pumiskokilo 
III.32) 
yanmadhur. cukija (Lunarasambhava 111.32) 
m 
A similer description is found in Yanavabhyudaya 
VIII.23. 
asvaaya cut, hurmenyovu, tāl 
204 
(5) The Lord made the word me its a nearance with the help of the brush of the three gupas, 
Jat ivarpar canavic.t-itam vivicitramdanila- 
shira 
yarthavan 
Atmal hittiniyat piriyah tulikām trigupalakṣapām 
vahan (YA. XVII.104) 
The words milayat, tulika and citra are used 
Gere as a esult of Kalidasa's use of them in. 
unm litam tulikayeva citram (Kumarasambhava I. 32) 
(6) Satruthna, who vanquished the demon Lavapa, was 
greeted by the sages. He is described by kalidasa, 
as having his head bent down owane to chyness. 
vridayavanatam sirp 
(Ramuvamsa. XV. 27) 
Similarly, when Vasudeva pra sed Krsna for having 
sJain Kamsa, Kropa bent his head down in shyness. 
iti vijnapitaste na vridadiva nato vibhub (YA.X.84) 
(7) Himavan became elated at the arrival of the seven sages at his abode and expressed his food luck by describing his status to have grown higher. 
avaimi utamatmanam dvayenaiva dvijottamah 
murdhni gangaprapatena dhautapadambhasa ca vap 
(Kumarasanthava VI.57) 
Similar y Jambavan greets Krspa's arrival in his 
cave after recognizing the home in quite a similar way. 
en bec e purified by the rust of Krspa's feet. 
Vanam adetannahitam tapovanam 
giriñen vedmi tridasesvaralavam/ 
p. celinam kim nu tapo talasya me 
prasadhitam yutlava pādapamsubhi' 
(YA. XIV.28) 
8) The atrocities committed by Taraka by bringing 
the gods under his subjugation are vividly described 
in the Kumar sambhuva (II. 18-2). Similarly, Indra's 
Cescription of insults and offences hu led at him and 
of her gods by Narakisura s on identical lines with 
different expressions A. XVI. 29-4)) 
(9) 
Raghu asked Kautsa, the discini of Var.tantu, who approached him for a huge amount of wealth to be given to his preceptor, whether the bulls and other 
205206 
animals which eat away the produces in the fields are kept away, in order to have plenty of produce (Raghuvansa V,9). 
Similarly Krsna asks his men headed by Satyaki 
when they were to undertake a victorious march to 
keep evil doers under control so as to be of help to 
the good people. Prevention of the bulls and other 
animals destroying the produce becomes the cause for 
the increase in yield in the fields (YA.XXII. 9). 
(10) The author's use of certain expressions also 
shows Kalidasa's influence upon him. 
(1) bal 
bāĺrkavarpanvasanam vasānam 
(YA, VII. 1) 
Kumarasambhava, III.54) 
ef: 
vaso vasana tarupārkaragan 
(YA, XIX. 76) 
ef: 
ef: 
(11) saukhasayanika 
saukhasayanikanɣşın 
(111) vipatpratīkarapareņasakhya 
vipatpratikarapare namangalam 
(Raghuvansa, X. 14) 
(YA. XXIII. 35) 
(Kumarasambhava, 7.76) 
207 
Like Kalidasa, the author uses epithets, while describing the Lord's qualities, by showing that these qualities appear antithetical in the case of God. Such antithetical expressions are found in the imunahasranama : 
apurorhat, krah sthula gupabhrt nirgupo mahan 
ananyadina mahima svadhinaparavaibhava 
anekarupai svayame karupay 
(ZA, I. 44) 
(IA, VIII.2) 
ananyadharamadharamananyesvaramisvaram 
...ananyadhipatin patim 
(YA, X. 68) 
gupasindhurasau gunativarti 
(YA, XV. 5) 
ameyo mitalokastramanarthi prarthanavahap 
ajito jiuratyantamavyakto vyaktakaraṇam 
(Raghuvansa, X. 18) 
Cf: Raghuvansa, X. 18 to 201 Kumarasambhava, II. 9; 
V. 77. 
(11) The influence of Kalidasa is seen in another 
instance as well. 
Kalidasa summarises the whole of the Ramayana, Kandas Ayodhya to Yuddha in Canto XII. Similarly Vedantadesika 
condenses the whole of the Mahabharata story including the Bhagavadgita in Canto XXIII. 
It is also evident that the author has modelled his Kavya primarily on Magha's Sisupalavadha as far 
as the contents are concerned though the incidents 
dealt with in Magha's work get treated here in a 
single Canto XV. 
The author owes to Magha for describing the 
awakening of Krsna from his slumber found in the 
whole of the Canto of XIX. Magha's poem presents 
a similar description in the whole of Canto Sisupalavadha. 
XI of 
Narada's descent from the sky is described by 
Magha as a halo of lustre at first sight, then as an 
embodied being, later as a man, and finally as Narada. 
cayastvigamityavadharitam pura 
tatap sarīrīti vibhavitakṛtim/ 
vibhurvibhaktavayavam pumaniti 
kramadamum narada ityabodhi sap 
(Si upalavadha 1.3) 
The author describes a scene in the reverse 
manner, 
The chariot in which Krsna left Gokula for 
208 
Mathura, goes out of sight at first, and then the sound of the rim of the wheel is not heard; then the dust raised by the running of the chariot also 
disappears from view. 
na rathab paridṛśyate mahān 
na ca nemistanitam nisamyate/ 
na ca requrito vijmbhate 
tadāpi bhrasyati jivitam na naḥ// (YA.IX.113) 
The description of the seasons, forest-sights 
and political discussions which abound in Magha's 
work have their good use in this Kavya. 
Canto XV of Sisupalavadha, Ślokas 14-21, are 
addressed by sisupala to the Pandavas, and Bhisma, 
decrying their justification for honouring Kṛṣṇa 
in preference to all other princes, who were 
assembled there. The author's description of this 9 in Canto XV. 42-54 bears the influence of Magha. 
However, the vituperative expressions found 
in Magha's work which are profusely hurled at Kṛṣṇa are all avoided lest they should be taken by the 
209 
210 
ignorant a3 1aving a well-formed background for all these insimations. Again Bhigma has correctly portrayed the 
views of elders, that man should serve God, here Krsna, 
by all means. 
The authe- was mach indebted to Magha for the description 
of certain & ipects or practices but did not adopt the language of Magha. 
karayuɛ wnadma mukulapavarjitaip pativesma lajakusumai- 
ravakiran 
avadirasaktiputa muktimuktikaprakarairiva priyarathanga- 
mangana (Magha XIII. 37) 
pracarregat truțitena cakre narepa mustaphala- 
varsipanya 
aduratap sannihitasya saureb acaralajanjali- 
purverangan (YA, XIII. 50) 
Throwing fried grains by woman on tre prominent 
person (here the wedded pair) is found men ioned by Magha. 
The influence of ancient Vaisnavu scholars is 
also seen in this Kavya. Akrura's longing that his head should receive the imprint of the feet of Krspa marked by signs of conch, aise and others is seen in the Stotraratna of Yamunacarys. Sage Karila in his 
211 
message to his mother Devahuti makes a similar 
reference. 
10 
The title Kavitarkikasimha is used by Appaya Dīksita by which the author was then known in the literary circles in the 16th century. However, it will not be wrong to note how the author, a Tarkikasinha as he was, made good use of his Sastraic knowledge and 
also his close acquaintance with all tantras, in this 
literary composition. For example, the author has 
taken from the field of Vedanta, a principle known 
11 
as Tatkrathyava which states that a person who entertains 
a particular view or has a particular determination will 
get it in the next birth. His deep knowledge of the 
Nyaya principles is revealed in certain contexts where 
the enemies are shown to have suffered at the hands 
of Ugrasena as he had a wealth of five means of administering justice, namely, (i) undertaking a work, (ii) selecting proper men and materials (iii) choosing the right time and place, (iv) avoiding the pitfalls and (v) getting the things done. This is compared to the employment of the five limbs of reasoning (tarka). 
12 
212 
In another context, 'he author describes the: efforts of the demons, who supported Narakasura, to attack Kropa to have resulted in their own defeat like the futile rejoinler (Jatyuttara). 
13 
The author's acquaintance with the ritualistic un'ertakings is revealed in the description of the 
fight between Krsna and Jambavan. Jambavan initiated 
himself to perform a sacrifice (here a fight) in which 
the oblations are to be received by one (here Lord 
Krspa), who takes the leading part, in taking away 
what all is offered in all acrifices. The fight 
is 'saptatantu', a sacrifice. By employing his hands 
and feet Jambavan played the role of rtvikspriests 
in that war - sacrifice. 
The author's knowledge of administrative policies 
and political sar-city is best revealed in the address delivered by Kspa to Satyaki and his men. Appaya 
15 
Diksita has supplied all the relevant passages from the 
Kamadaka's Nitisare in support of Krapa's address. 
Abhir natya is a kind of dance performed by bbhār harm 
16 
cowherdesses. Cari is a kind of dance pose in which 
the foot, shank and waist together move in unison with a another. The commentator supports this explanation from the Sangitaratnakara, while Saradatanaya offers a slightly different definition. 
Sangita should consist of dance, vocal music, 
and instrumental music. The author finds an element 
of music - drum in the. 
rumblings of the clouds, 
song in the whistling of the winds mixed with the 
rains, and dance in the flashes of lightning - all constituting a novel music.17 
Krsna's playing on the flute caused delight 
even to the Kinnaras and also to the inhabitants of 
all the worlds. This singing was embellished by the 
svaras rising from three places chest, throat and head and heard as mandra, madhya and tara. The svaras 
were grouped into gramas with three names sadja, madhyama and gandhara.1 
18 
Jambavan's fight with Krsna gets depiction in 
another way. He addresses Krsna. 
213 
visudanmiśraiśc turaśravitakaip- 
raçādhatungai} pramitāmi takrumalp/ 
ananya bhavan anukampate bhavan 
acintyacintyravstarunataknip// (YA.XIV.35) 
The Loni Lakes pity on those who are devoted to Him and m alone. lie takes for this purpose, descents which are humain and also mi od up with animal form. 
They are attractive, incomprehensible to others, known 
and also unknown to many. They are like dramatic 
performances having Viskambhag an 
admixture of pure and impure kinds. 
The author has exibited his originality in 
conception and execution in writing the poem. To 
Avoid monotony in description, he makes Krppa as à narrator of the sights in the forest drawing Balarama's 
attention to them (Canto VIII). The celestial garden 
of Indra is descrioed by Krapa to Satyabhama again to avoid himself (author) becoming the narrator (Canto XVIII). 
The title of the Kivya is given as Yadavabhyudava. 
As the comentator notes: 
yadavasya kö... sya bhyudayım vişayikṛtya köṛte 
214 
215 
The poem is to present the glory, the prosperous rise Vasudevasut odavam of Krsna, a descendant of Iadu. The author takes care to depict Yadu as a dutiful monarch in whose kingdom peace prevailed. Gods themselves took him for a guardian of quarters (dikpala), who was dexterous (daksing), in whose land, learning associated with lack 
of conduct was at a discount. Yet Nahuşa and Yayati, who 
were the successors of Yadu had a stigma in their 
character, mentioned in the Puranas, which are not 
noted by the author, in order to avoid reference to 
them, thereby seeking to depict Krspa's ancestry as 
impeccable. 
Yayati cursed Yadu for his unwillingness to have 
his youthfulness exchanged for his father's old age. The curse was that the descendants of Devayani should not succeed to his throne. However, Krsna removed this disqualification and proved that Yadava successors, though coming in the line of Devayani, 
vere admirable rulers. 
It is to maintain that this family was noted for its popularity and discipline that the author avoided giving in his poem, the description of theextinction of the Yadava race in its drinking brawl. 80 the poem is in praise of Krsna alone and concludes with his happy life, though the names of Yadu and other members of the family required a reference and brief 
suitable 
description in suitable contexts. 
Though the title 'Yadavabhyudaya' glorifies 
Krspa's life, yet it was Ugrasena that was reinstated 
by Krspa as a ruler and so he did not himself undertake 
the victorious march. The task was entrusted to Satyaki, 
a prominent leader of the Yadava's. 
Thus the various components, figures, sentiments, expressions, descriptions and others have been blended to form a harmonious whole in which no part suffers 
for want of due attention. It is therefore appropriate that the author should give expression to what he 
considers as an ideal poet. 
sa kavinkathyeteśrestha remate yatrabhāratī 
rasabhavagupi@bhutair alankarairgunodayaiḥ (YA.I.5) 
216 
. 
It is generally recognised that a poet is a creator, 
kavire appraiapatih'. He creates a world that is based 
on the real world but representing what an ideal world should be like. The poet does not present in his 
compositions the actualities as they are, since what 
is obt ining in the world is dull and dross, giving 
plenty of occasions for suffering and disappointment. 
Art is a window through which one sees the world 
perfected by the brush of the poet who is a painter, 
as it were, so as to provide the people with relief 
consolation and hope. Hence the poet is called a 
creator. Here the author uses the word srasta, in whose creation the language, bharati revels 
'ramate'. 
The author was well aware of the three factors 
that are essential to contribute for heightening the effect of language. The first one is, Dhvani; and gupibhutavyangya of Rasa and Bhava, the second is the proper use of Alankara and the third is to give a good room for the qualities (guna). 
217 
218 
If the author had displayed his mastery over the Sabdalankara in Canto VI, it was done in emulation of what an eminent poet Magha did in his Ka. Hence he observes that he did all this in a simplified manner se as to attract the people to worship Govardhana as Krapa. 
Among the Arthalankara-s, the author has special 
attraction for Upama, Rupaka, Utpreksa and Atigavokti. 
The ideal of any poet should be to educate people 
and put them in the right path of conduct. Any theme 
taken up by a poet may be good by itself, but is not 
free from the evil ways of the wicked. It is to show 
that people should learn what is good for them. Hence 
the author did not depict mausala-yuddha, which brought 
the Yadava family to utter extermination. Therefore the poet extols that good conduct is more worthy of 
attainment than mere learning. 
sa ca vrtta vihinasya na vidyam bahvamanyate (YA.1.22) 
Again in laying stress on conduct, Krspa is 
shown to draw Satyabhama's attention to the condition 
of Heaven when the Parijata tree was taken away from it. 
219 
The garden of Indra was like Vedic learning devoid 
of good conduct. 
ttena hinamiva vedavidyam 
(IA. XVIII. 2a) 
A poet may be born or may be made by training. 
He has to adapt himself to the environments of literary traditions; which do not remain constant but go on 
changing from age to age. Matter attained high importance in Valmiki and Vyasa, from becoming the medium for 
conveying it. The simplest form of language is therefore 
found adopted in the works of these writers. Matter and 
form had a happy blending each getting due attention. 
This is noticed in the works written during the period 
of Kalidasa. Matter became undermined by form which 
got developed in a variety of ways; what could have been clearly conveyed with a few slokas required greater 
●laboration. Some of the descriptions in the Sisupalavadha, Janakiharana, Kapphinabhyudaya, Haravilava and Naisadhīva- carita, whether it is nature or incident or human emotion, are unduly long and sometimes tedious too. The writer had to display his originality in handling these matters 
by a powerful use of forms which take the shape of Sabdalankaras or recondite use of both nominal and verbal forms. In this, matter remained almost the same, 
the differences in the treatment being maintained by a clever use of figures of speech. The import that 
is intended to be conveyed remained almost the same 
appearing rather repented in distinct and different 
forms 
It was in this literary atmosphere that Vedanta 
desika had to write this kavya. Had he adopted the 
ways of Kalidasa he would have been condemned as having failed to approach Magha or Sriharga in using 
his poetic talents. Yet, there are some striking 
features in his writings. Words are used mostly to 
convey the sense, though attempts are rarely found to employ rare formations. Secondly, descriptions of nature, seasons and rains are lengthy and are to be justified taking into accounts the poetic tendencies as are revealed in the works of the earlier poets like Magha and Śrīharsa. Thirdly, the ethical aspect of life gets special attention at the hands of the 
220 
author, who, besides being a poet, was an eminent spiritualist of Vaisnavism and so had to convey to the readers what an ideal life shared be like. Repetitions of ideas or principles of life therefore deserve justification. Fourthly, the author did not employ the language in an uneasy and knotty way as found in Bharavi and Śrīharya and even Magha. In some 
respects, his language has a seeming approach to Klidasa's though not having comparability. 
One other point that is noteworthy is the care 
with which the author does not offer long description 
in his poem for drinking bouts and sexual dalliances that are suggested in the works of Kalidasa and are prominently displayed in the works of Magha and Sriharga. This is because of the mental outlook 
of the author. Yet one may note, in Canto XII what are not generally expected of a writer. Like Kalidasa, a devotee of Parvati and Siva depicting Parvati's beauty in the Kumarasambhava Canto I, the author an ardent devotee of Krspa and Rukmiņi, 
It is rather difficult to depicts Rukmiņī here. 
221 
222 
reconcile how an eminent poet Kalidasa could have depicted Parvati in this manner. Equally difficult 
it is to understand the author's emulation of Kalidasa in this respect. However, a defence could be offered. Kalidasa must have considered Siva as an ideal hero and Parvati as a heroine at the human level in spite 
of his devotion to them. Vedantadesika too looked 
upon Kalidasa as his guide in this respect and portrayed Rukmini as a human being raised to the level of a heroine. 
Failure to present the heroine in this way should have 
been considered by Kalidasa as amounting to an imperfect 
depiction at the hands of a poet. Vedantadesika should 
have understood this kind of portrayal at the hands of 
Kalidasa and so followed suit. Otherwise the author 
would deserve severe questioning, particularly because he was a spiritualist and philosopher, while Kalidasa did not show any such claim to his being a spiritual 
teacher. 
This poem however requires to be appreciated from different angles of the roles which the author played. He was a poet of high order, a moralist, 
a spiritualist, a philosopher and above all, an ardent 
devotee of Krapa. Every aspect of poetry fits in well 
with the composite whole,the poem. The author is next 
to none either in vocabulary, richness of imagery, skill 
in choosing the appropriate figure of speech or metre, 
and hence the poem is truly a Kşemada kavyaratna. 
The word kşemada conveys a profound significance 
presenting the ideals for which the author has stood. 
Kşema is keeping secure things one has acquired by the 
grace of God. But what one has got shall not be cast 
aside, hoping to get what is not within one's reach. 
Thus contentment (trpti) in God's gifts leading towards 
the enjoyment of bliss appears to have been the sole aim 
in the mind of the author in writing this Kavvaratna. 
Many scholers like his son, Kumara Varadacarya 
Prativadi Bhayankara Appan, Mahacarya and Venkatadhvarin 
have paid their encomia in recognition and admiration of 
the author's eminence. It will not be superfluous, if reference is made here to the slokas 48 and 50 among 
223 
NOTES 
1. Sankalpa Survodaya is said to have been written 
to refute Krspa Misra, who wrote Prabodhachard rodava 
in favour of Advaita. 
vide: Doddayacarya's Vaibhava Prakasika, 
Śls. 81 and 82. 
Also Chetulur Narasimhachariar's Desika and His 
Works. p. 106-109. which mentions the places where 
Desika's works were written. 
2. Vaibhavaprakasika. $1. 83 
3. Desika and His Works by C. Narasimhachariar, 
P. 110. 
4. 
Vide: New Catalogus Catalogorum Vol. I. p. 372-73 
5. Vaibhavaprakasika. 61.17; Desika and His Worka, 
P. 100. 
6. Santatiratnamalika. 81. 31; Vaibhava Prakasika, 
$1. 50,53,54. 
7. A. I. 8 
224 
225 
8. Asvaghosa's Saundarananda. VI. 34 
9. IA. XV. 42 to 54; Sisupalavadha. XV. 
10. XA. IX. 35; Yamunacarya's Stotraratna. 81. 318 
cf: Bhagavata III. 28–21; Śrīvaikuntastava of 
Srivatsankamisra. S1. 70 
11. A. IV. 35; of: Candorepanisad III. 14.1 
12. Ibid. X.113. A detailed explanation is found, Appaya 
Dikşita's commentary on this loka. 
13. XA. XVI. 96 
14. 
Ibid. XIV. 14 
15. Ibid. XXII. 2 to 53 
16. Ibid. XIV. 61 
17. Ibid. VII. 32 
18. Ibid. VIII. 54.APPENDIX 
LIST 
OF 
. I 
ALANKĀRAS 
Expanã 
1. 7, 15, 15, 16, 18, 19, 30 (MX (sparnell) 
32, 91 
I. 59, 64, 65A, 89, 76, 87 
7. 12 
T. 
28 ( द्वितीयय हो) 
v. 45 (शब्दशक्तिमूल उपमालंकारध्वनि:) 
58, 59, 61, 76, 92. 
VR. 4,18 
w.b 
Ananraya 
Rūpana 
XIII. 6, 15, 22, 23, 29, 344, 67, 71, 72 
XN. 12, 17, 18, 37, 65, 71 (Māloperā), 74 
*Y 93, 105, 111, 113 
1. 55 
I. 11, 12, 22, 26, 47, 54, #4, IDD 
I.1,68, 70, 97. 
Blipuna. (combates) 
V. 43, bp, an 
Vil In 
x. 75 
XL 70 
X. 53 
18 
66 
XIV. Hal 
XV. 24, 109, 118, 124 
Parinaunce 
I. 50, 54, 58, 82, 18, 624. 
V. 82 
VIN- 5 
21t prekąd 
1. 10,44, 66, 68, 71,90 
J. 5. 6. 7, 13, 15, 1,46, 5, 62, 63 
658 
1. 22, 35, 32, 99, 14, 119 
V. 43, 44, 53, 54, 83, 40, 95 
VI. 16, 20, 21, 22, 27, 34, 35, 8b, 
45, 34,62,71,72. 
M. N, 15, 19, 22, 28, 105, 13. 
Dr. 23, 24 
XI. 67, 68,73. 
X. 33, 35, 36, 37 
A. 2,5,25,32 
Sandeha 
W. 24 
Kavyaliviga 
W. 35 
Parikara 
I. I 
Parikarankuva 
IV. 119 
VI. Yo 
Atisayouti 
1. 8,7 
2a, 
1. 4,85 
IV. 100 
Tulyayogitä 
Vyati reka 
Sahokti 
W!. 25,51 
XIR. 93 
2.24 
m. ta 
ni.80 
1.86. 
Samasokti 
'V. 55, 56 
śleṣa 
Aprastuta praśnṁsā 
Arihantharanya sa 
Vill. 12 
I. 25a, 
Xm. 102 
1.52 
D." 
Akşepa 
Vyâjokti 
Virodhābhā su 
7.5 
VII. 53 
1.95 
IV. 95 
VI. 36 (श्लेषमूल 8) 
1.94 
Vibhāvanā 
Samuccaya 
m. 1, 14 
IV. 48 
IV. 28 
Viseṣa 
Parisarikhyā 
I. 20, 
21 
Svabhavokti 
I. 73 
W. 
20, 25, 30, 84 
Anumana 
V. 29,30. 
1.256. 
Sankara 
I. 2 
अप्रस्तुतप्रशंसार्थापत्तिरूपकाणां 
संकर : 
1. 8,9. श्लिष्टरूपक संकर: । 
1.79 - रूपकोपमानयो: संकरः । 
1.98 अनन्वयव्यतिरे क्यों 8 संकरः । 
3.24 तुल्ययोगिताश्लेषयोः संकरः । 
3.26 श्लेषानुमानयो: संकरः । 
7. 3. रूपकव्यतिरेकयो : संकर:/ 
१. निदर्शनारूपकयो : संकर:- 1 
1 
37, 38. मध्यव साथ अतिशयोक्त्या संस् 
· 
39, 99, 50, 75, 81. उत्प्रेक्षा - 
रूपकयोः खङ्करः। 
40. 
श्लेष - अतिशयोक्ति संकरः । 
' 
HI- 
अपमा रूपकयो: संकरः । 
रूपल काव्यलिङ्ग उत्प्रेक्षाणां संकरः । 
Sankara 
7.43 
4 
अपह्नुति - उत्प्रेक्षा यो संकर 
49 
1 
रूपक - अतिश‌योलि - 
उत्प्रेक्षाणां संकरः । 
48,61. उत्प्रेक्षा- समासोक्त्यो: संकर: । 
60. 
उपनोत्प्रेक्ष योः संकरः । 
71. 
काव्यलिङ्ग - अतिश‌योक्ति - 
2 
उत्प्रेक्षाणी संकर है। 
उत्प्रेक्षा उपमायोः संसृष्टिः । 
- 
क. रूपक अतिशयोक्त्यो १ संकरः । 
80. अपद्धति - समासोक्ति- 
83 
उपमानां संकर : 
अतिशयोक्ति - अपह्नुति 
श्लेषाणा संकर / 
92. अतिश‌योक्ति - उत्प्रेक्षा - 
- 
काव्यलिङ्गानां संकरः । 
प्र.50 उपमानुप्राणित अपहृत्यलङ्कारः 
10.1 रूपकसङ्कीर्णोत्प्रेक्षा 
Sarikara 
15 
V. 75 Sestant anferataifin- 
- अतिशयोक्ति 
काव्यलिङ्गानां संकरः । 
4. अपह्नुति - रूपकयो: संकरः । 
83. 
107. 
उपमासंकीर्णोत्प्रेक्षा । 
उत्प्रेक्षा सन्देहयोः संकरः । 
Yatha sariknya 
Vill. 6 
Yathartha 
XII. 98 
Nidarsana 
XIII. 51 
APPENDIX - II 
LIST OF CHITRABANDHASYADAVĀBHYUDAYA CANTO VI 
बन्धः 
गोमूत्रिकाबन्धः 
तुरगबन्ध: 
कः 
64, 65 
65 
षोडशदलपद्मबन्धो 
वोडशारन्चत्रणन्धो का 
98 
सर्वतोभद्रम् 
99,100 
अर्धभ्रमकम् 
102 
मुरजबन्धः 
103 
पद्मबन्धः 
खुरबन्ध : 
105 
52 
षडरचक्रम् (कविकाव्यनामाङ्कितम् ) 104 
SISUPALA VADHA OF 
MAGHA: CANTO 19 
: 
लोकः 
सर्वतीभ 
मुरजब गौमूत्रिकाबा 
अर्थभ्रमकम् 
Rel 
མི་ན 
46 
72 
120 
APPENDIX - III 
LIST OF CHLTRAS 
गोमूत्रिका बन्धः 
श्लोकौ VI. 68,65 
दे व स्था न मि वे न्धा नं प रा य ण म वा रितम् X X X X X X X X X गो व र्ध न म वे ो 
X X X X X X ने ना रा य ण मि वा ग तम् 
मोघा शो म ध वा न्दे वः स्थाद त्र त्य स्य सा द ने X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
मेघा ना मपि वा भावः सा द मे त्य 
द्रिसाद ने 
मो 
स्था 
मे 
सा 
9 
घा 
द 
घा 
द 
तुर गबन्धः 
मोघाशो मघवान्देवः स्यादत्रत्यस्य सादने 
मेचानामापे वा भाव: 
18 
2 
शो . 
त्र 
ना 
मे 
19 
27 
મ 
त्थ 
न 
त्य 
20 
28 
12. 
। 
सादनेत्यद्रिसादने ॥ VI. 65 ॥ 
घ 
स्थ 
पि 
द्रि 
5 
13 
21 
29 
वा 
सा 
वा 
सा 
" 
22 
30 
" 
न्दे 
द 
भा 
द 
15 
7 
23 
31 
वः 
न्ने 
वः 
ने 
24 
32 
श्लोक: VI. 98 
जया नया नया नया 
नया नया नया जया । 
नया नया नया जया 
क्यानयानयानया ॥ 
षोडशदलपद्मबन्ध: 
+ 
4 
न 
5 
ન 
५ 
भ 
५ 
94 
भ 
न 
था 
भ 
ज 
न 
श्लोकः n. 98 
या या 
या 
था 
या 
नया नया ज्यानया 
था 
नयनयानयानया । 
जया जया गया नया 
था 
नयानयानया नया ॥ 
न 
या 
षोडशारचक्रबन्धः 
F 
या 
या 
था ! 
५ 
श्लोकः v1.99 
मा या भा 
सा 
स 
भा । या 
या मा 
माया भासा सा भायामा 
यासुनाया यातास्या । 
भातायायायायाता भा 
सायायागे गेया या सा ॥ 
या सू । ता । या 
भा ता 
या या ता भा 
ए | 5 | 
या ; ता 
ता सू या 
या । या 
सा 
था। या। गे या गे 
गे 
या 
या सा 
सा या या गे 
गे 
या 
या 
सा 
सर्वतोभद्रम् 
भा 
ता या । या या 
या 
ला । भा 
या सू ता या 
। 
। 
या तासू या 
मा 
या 
भा सा 
सा 
भाया मा 
। 
| 5 | 5 15 5 
श्लोकः VI. 100 
सेग माननमावासे 
वासिता हिहितासिवा । माता पिता तापितामा 
नहिताततता हि न प 
सर्वतोभद्रम् 
से 
बा 
मा 
ज 
न 
मा 
वा । से 
वा 
सि 
। ता 
ता 
हि 
हि 
ता 
सि 
वा 
मा 
ता 
पि 
। ता 
ता 
| 
पि 
ता मा 
न | हि 
ता 
त 
त 
ता 
हि 
न 
न हि ता 
त 
त 
ता 
हिन 
मा 
ता पि ता 
ता 
पि ता मा 
वा 
सि । ता 
ता 
हि 
हि 
ता 
हि । तासि । वा 
से । वा 
मा । न 
न 
मा वा से 
अर्धभ्रमक म् 
श्लोकः V1. 102 
नदीसारसमेतात्र दीता भासा नरावृता। सामानासौ माभिरामे रसा सौम्या सुमानस 
" 
न 
दी 
सा 
서 
2 
3 
4 
to 
प्ता 
भा 
सा 
10 
12 
सा 
17 
भा 
ना 
18 
M 
20 
र 
सा 
सौं 
सौ म्या 
25 
24 
27 
भ 
स 
32 
मे 
न" | रा 
मा 
सु 
29 
भि 
मा 
24 
23 
2 
a 
ता 
اهم 
श 
16 
14 
न 
13 
ऽत्र 
ता 
मे 
쇠 
7 
Inव 
सु 
to 
वसुदा 
मुरजबन्ध : 
श्लोक: Mo168 
श्रमदानन्द धीसुदान्त मुदा नता। 
नानदा मुक्तिदा राज्य सनदाउन सदा रमा ॥ 
दा 기 
" 
28 
स 
24 
दा 
न 
न्द 
18 
दा 
न 
ता 
धो 
ता 
- 
सु 
न 
स 
25 
न 
दा 
Fo 
दा 
Fo 
दा 
27 
" 
3 
न्त 
मु 
SЯ 
12 
मु 
क्ति | दा 
स 
น 
S 
to 
दा 
22 
서 
र 
17 
म्या 
24 
सा 
12 
to 
व 
मुरजबन्ध : 
englong v.103 
वसुदा प्रसदानन्द धीसुदान्त मुदा नता । 
नानदा मुक्तिदा रम्या सनदाउन सदा रसा ॥ 
सु 
10 
दा 
= 
24 
27 
स 
29 
दा 
धी 
ता 
१ 
17 
सु 
न 
2. 
26 
27 
न्त 
གཤཆ 
दा 
3 
मु 
20 
मु 
लि 
13 
21 
त 
दा 
to 
14 
& 
न 
न 
19 
7 
र 
ล 
31 
न्द 
ता 
म्या 
16 
27 
स 
25 
भ 
13 
दा 
3 
त्र 
+ 
स 
5 
दा 
22 
시 
23 
सा 
32 
पद्मबन्धः 
वासे नास्मिन् प्रजाऽदेवा 
बादे ! जातातोधारावा । 
! 
बाराद्याविर्भूता जीवा बाजीतात्रादीना सेवा ॥ 
त्रा 
2t 
दी 
29 
अ 
32 
27 
26 
C5 
वा 
30 A 3 
2 
स्मि 
पू 
5 
अष्टदलपद्मबन्ध इति 
व्याख्याने । तत्राभियत - 
प्रकारापेक्षया एवं निवेश 
उचित एव । 
ता 
21 
দ 
20 वि 
19 
18 27 15 
धा 
14 
13 
sta 
12 
खुरबन्धः 
श्लोकः 0.52 
सभा-जनं वदाम्येतत् गव्यैः सरस- भाजनम् । सभाजनं गिरैरर्थ्य स्ववृत्युल्लास - भाजनम् ॥ 
तत् 
व 
el ज्बे उद 
वृ 
2 
सभाजन 
10 
3 
29 
स्व 
5 
VI 
78 
स 
गि 
ই 
Œ oh w 
षडश्चक्रम् 
(कत्रि 
7,57 
ङ्कितम् ) 
सदैवे रथात वैभव ताशी युच्चनानागभे 
1 75 
भव्यकर्म सदार्चितोद्भव नदीयादरसनाथीकृ‌नै चित्राव्यनुनाहिनातक नश्रेयः प्रचयोत्सवे वेदोकाया समय भनेः श चि गिरौ मेकलले प्रस्थिन् १ 
श्रु 
अत्र बन्धे तृतीयकोष्टे षष्टकोष्टे च स्थितानां स्थूलाक्षराणां पठने 
74 सिमेन् 
बेङ्कटना 
भयुदय : 
इति कविकाव्यनामग्रहोऽवधेयः 
13, 
कत्या 
त्या या च प्र यः से ज 
at 
Got I 
'2 
71 
sto How B 
24 24 
भ 
भ्यु 
च 
ना 
अ 
१० 
म 
62 
तोचि दस में बहुव्य ने 
वा हि वा क य ह ता चि 
शै I 
69 
जे: 65 
39, 67 
APPENDIX 
LIST 
OF 
IV 
TAMAKAS 
एकपादाभागावृत्तियमकं 
अनुप्रास 
द्वितीय चतुर्थपाद‌योः भागावृत्तियमकं 
चतुर्थपादे भागावृत्तियमक 
पूर्वोत्तरार्धयोः यमकं पादद्व‌यादि 
यमकमिति यमकद्व‌यसंसृष्टिः J 
यमकचतुष्टय संसृष्टिः 
सदरायमर्क, खण्डयमकै 
3 
7 
1, 2,5, 13, 37. 
6, 10, 11, 12. 
14 
15 
पूर्णयमकं 
मद्यथमक 
पादार्थावृत्तियमकद्वयर्ससृष्टिः 
पादाद्यन्त भागावृत्तिः 
} 
16 
18, 28 
19 
21 
श्रृङ्खला यमकं 
सन्दष्टयमकं 
आपन्त भागा वृत्तियमर्क 
पादान्तयमक 
22, 34, 49. 
24, 30, 32, 35, 36. 
25, 26, 52 
27. 
पादचतुष्टयान्तयमकं 
31, 53, 55,60,61. 
पादाहान्तयमक 
33. 
पदावृत्तियमक 
इस्वतिस्वर्शचत्र ( यमकसंसृष्ट" ) 
युग्मपादावृलियम‌क 
वृत्यनुप्रासः 
चक्रवालयमक 
बिन्दुमती 
क्रिया चतुष्य प्रहेलिका 
38. 
39. 
42,46. 
43. 
44,45 
47. 
48 
पादादियमक 
50 
युग्मेषु पाद‌यमकं 
57,58,62,63,72,73,75. 
चतुष्पदेष्वपि भिन्नपद्यमक 
59, 60, 61. 
चित्रबन्धनानि 
164, 65, 66, 67, 100, 
वर्णचित्राणि 
101, 103, 104, 105. 
68, 69, 70 
द्वारा क्षर वर्णचित्र 
स्थाजगत अमुर्धन्य वर्ण विशिष्ट 
- 
शब्दचित्रम 
78 to 90 
91, 92. 
71, 
अयुग्मादियमक 
अर्धयनक 
अनुलोमप्रति सोमयमर्क 
अनु को मप्रति लोग यमकं पढे 
74. 
76, 99. 
98. 
एकक्रियान्वित श्लोकावृत्तियमकं 
भिन्नैका क्षर चित्रम् 
एका क्षर चित्रम् 
17. 
93, 94,95. 
96 
अर्धभ्रमकचित्रम 
महायमक 
आद्यन्तयमकं 
सर्वत्रचतुष्पाद्यमक 
अयुग्मे अन्तयमकं 
युग्मे आदियमको 
102 
106, 107. 
52 
53, 55 to 60, 61. 
54. 
युग्मेषु अन्त्ययमकं 
56. 
युग्मे पादस्यैव यमकं 
57, 58, 62,63. 
चतुष्पदेष्वपि भिन्नपदयमक 
चित्रबन्धनानि 
59, 60, 61. 
64 to 67.उत्तरार्धे त्रिपद थमक चित्रम् 
68. 
APPENDIX - 
METRICAL ANALYS IS 
APPENDIXIE 
METRES IN THE ORDER OF PREPONDERANCE 
1% 
Upajati 
942 
2. 
Armastubh 
647 
3'. 
Vamsastha 
237 
4. 
Aupacandrasikam 
138 
5. 
Rathoddhata 
137 
6. 
Viyogini 
127 
7. 
Vasantatilaka 
105 
8. 
Drutavilambita 
83 
9. 
Puspitagra 
76 
10. Svagata 
70 
11. 
Malini 
34 
12. 
Mandakranta 
10 
13. Narkuta 
5 
14. 
Pramanika 
5 
15. 
15% 
4 
Totaka 
16. 
Vidyunmala 
3 
17. Sardulavikrijita 
18. Praharini 
3 
19. Pytbvï 
20. Manjubasinī 
m m m ~ N 
2 
2 
APPENDIX - VI 
GRAMMATICAL PECULARIT IKS 
अगदङ्कारं 
(XX) - 22 ) 
कारे सत्यागद्स्य 
अचकमत 
(xx) - 76) 
कमेर्णिङ् - एतद्‌भाव - 
पक्षे, च्लेः चडि, 
अचकमतेति रूपं निष्पन्नम् । 
अजूदाषत 
(xxl - 2 ) 
पिश्रिद्रुश्रुभ्यः कर्तरि चड् 
दीघों लघोः 
आकानिकी 
(xx11-159) 3411-4153. Beaded 
जजपूकम् (xx1 - 40 ) 
यजजपदर्शा यड. : 
धृतम् 
(XIX - १०) 
1 
अर्श आदिभ्योऽच् । 
अन्यथा कर्मात आवेचा हो 
नोपपद्येत । 
वाचाल 
(Xix - 9 ) 
आलजाटजी बहुभाषिणे 
विश्रामयामास (xxII - 185 ) 
· 
संश्रुणुष्व 
( xx1 - 8 ) 
निश्रामशब्दात् 
'तत् करोति इति 
व्यन्तात् साधुः । 
'अर्तिश्रृहशिभ्यश्च 
इति वार्तिकात् आत्मनेपद 
श्रृणोंतेरविवचितकर्मतया 
अकर्मकत्वम् । 
" 
सुगन्धयः 
(X0c11 - 199) 
गन्धस्येत्वे तदेकान्तग्रहणं 
कर्तव्यं" इति वार्तिके 
सत्यपि महाकविप्रयोगात् 
साधुः । नैषधे (0-94) 
स्वादुः सुगन्धिः स्वदते तुषारा 
इति वर्तते । तद्वत् " 
अधिचत्रे याशजूकाधिकारम् (XII - 108) 
तेन न द्विकर्मकता । 
कर्म प्रयुक्तम 
तत् एक एव 
अधिचत्रेत्यत्तात्मनेपदं 
अकर्तृगोप त्रियाफलस्य 
कर्तृगामित्वारोपात् इति 
ज्ञेयम् । 
अन्तरयाम्बभूवुः 
(X)11- 82 ) 
तत् लगेति 
इति णिच् । णाविष्टवत् 
इति इष्टवद्भावान् 
'विन्मतोलुक्' इति 
मनुपोर्लुक् । लिटि 
आगम्बादनुप्रयोग: । 
"तनादिभ्यस्त थासो : 
अमत 
(XMI-184) 
सिचो वालुव 
अस्मदिष्टम् 
(XVH-98) 
आस्थापयत् 
(XIII- 93 ) 
शेषषष्ट्या भूतकान्तेन 
वा समासः । तेन तेन 
च पूजायम्" इति 
समासनिषेधो न शङ्खय: । 
आरोहयत् इत्यर्थः । 
मन्त्रे एवं दर्शनात् । 
उद‌तिष्टत हाकारः (XVI - 107) 
नात्र उत्थानरूपकर्मविवक्षा 
अतोड त्रोर्ध्वकर्मैव । 
ओलण्डितम् 
( XVI -64) 
ओ लङि इति धातोरवयव 
जामदग्न्यराम 
(XV-49) 
त्वदनु‌ग्रह पुष्पितः (मv - 12 ) 
-P 
भूत ओंकार इति पक्ष साधुः । 
अनन्तरापत्येऽपि 
गोत्रत्वारोपेण गर्गादियम् । 
प्रकृत्यादिभ्य उपसंख्यान 
मिति वार्तिकम् । 
त्वदेकदृष्टेः 
(अनुग्रहेण पुष्पितः ) 
प्रकृत्यादित्वात् तृतीया । 
कर्तृकरणे कृता बहुलम् 
इति समासः । तेन, 
तवानुग्रह पुष्पित इति जातः। 
(XVII-53) लिङ्गमशिष्यं लोकाश्रयत्वात् 
लिङ्गस्य इति वचनात् 
स्त्रीत्वाविवक्षया एकशब्दोऽत्र 
नपुंसकलिङ्ग: । तदनन्तरं 
शिवभागतवत्_ त्वच्छाउदेन समासः 
त्वया निपीडनम् (XIV - 40) अन्तर्धी 'येनादर्शनमिच्छति 
इति सौत्रप्रयोगात् कृद्योगे ऽपि 
व्रतीयाया अन साधत्वम् । 
त्वत्यदैकहरू भक्तिरूपया (XV11 - 100) " दृढ भक्तिरिति ज्येष्ट 
( युतंशे X11 - 19 ) इत्यप्रेव 
अस्य साधुत्वं द्वैधा महि- 
नाथादिवत् शाधितम् । 
धिक्कृत्य 
(xv-97) 
धिक इति अनुग्ररागम् । 
तेज अनुकरणं चानिति पर 
इति गतिसंज्ञा । कुगति 
प्रादयः" इति समासः । 
तेन क्त्वो ल्यप् । 
निशामयाम : 
(XV - 88 ) 
रामो दर्श ने इति 
गणसूत्रात अमन्तत्वे sवि 
न 
ह्रस्वः 
' 
परश्शता 
(xv - 51 ) 
'पञ्चम इति योगविभागान् 
समासः । राजद‌न्तादित्वात्मधुमस्मरत् 
(XIV - 20 ) 
मूर्त इवास जादावेद: (xv43) 
परनिपातः शतशब्दस्य । 
पारस्करादित्वात शुट् । 
अधीगर्शदयेशां 
कर्मणि इति यद्यपि षष्ठी 
अत्र न्याय्या । तथाऽपि 
कर्मण: शेषत्वविवक्षा न 
विवक्षातः कारकाणि भवन्ति 
इति न्यायात् । तेज साधुः । 
आस इति जात्र 
अस भुवि इति धातुः । 
तस्य लिटि बभूव इत्येव 
रूपात्। आप 
तु 
अरु गति 
बोहवा दानेषु इति धातुः । तेन 
भू इत्यादेशो न । आस = दिदीपे ॥ 
- 
. 
444-441 
पदार्थानतिव 
अव्ययीभावसमासे अर्थ 
शब्देन सह शुप्, सुपा 
इति समासः । 
यमुनासा किसी व 
वनम् (XY) 
अन्न स्त्रीच्माले 
वक्षितम् । अन्यथा यमुना 
साक्षिणीक शी स्यात् । 
वधितः 
(xv) - 126) 
शौचादिकात 
वसुदेवजन्मनः वदौ (xav-70) 
वध धातोः निष्ान्तमेतत । 
अन्यथा ह्तः होते स्यात् । 
-3 
सम्प्रदाने पद्यपि 
चतुर्थी याच्या । बधाये 
T 
सम्बन्दारा मान्य षष्ठो। 
विवक्षार 8 कारकारण ज्यायेन 
षट्याः विवक्षया षष्टी 
वाचस्पतित्वं । दिवस्पतित्वं (XIII-5 ) 
'तत्पुरुषे कृति' 
इति बया अलुक् ।"षष्ट्याः 
पतिपुत्र 
"इति सत्तारो 
विसर्गस्य । 
वारणादवन तेन 
(XVII - 87 ) 
ल्यब्लोपे पञ्चमी । 
वारणादवरुह्य अवनतेज इत्यर्थः । 
यहा" निर्दिष्टविषय किचिदुपात 
विषयं तथा" इति वचनात् 
पञ्चमी उपात्तविषयिणी । 
षड्गुणः 
(XV - 74) 
षडवयवो गुणः 
षड्‌गुणः । गुणसमुदाय गुण - 
शब्दो लक्षणया वर्तते 
• 
मध्यमपदलोपी समासः । 
सम्भूतिः 
(XVIII-29) 
अनन्यैः 
(XVIR-54) 
अकर्तरि च 
कारके संज्ञायाम्' इति 
अधिकरणे क्तिन् प्रत्ययः । 
अमत 
(XIII - 104) 
अपेक्षाभावो नञर्थः । 
अभूषितः कान्तः इतिवत् 
श्रृङ्गारप्रकाशिका । 
तनादिभ्यस्तथासो: 
लुक् सिचः । 
कटाक्षशब्दात् 
'तत् करोति' इति ण्यन्तात् 
कटाक्षणैः 
(x111-64) 
ल्युट् । 
1 
प्रभुक्ता 
(XVIII - 26) 
भोलुमुपक्रान्ता । 
आदिकर्मणि क्तप्रत्ययः । 
कामकलास्व धीतिनी 
(xw - 72 ) 
इष्टादिभ्यश्च इति 
इनिप्रत्ययः । तस्य इन्विषयस्य' 
इति कर्मणि सप्तमी । 
अभवाय 
( xxl 
8 
55) 
कुपि संपद्यमाने येति 
वार्तिका चतुर्थी। नञ् तत्पुरुष 
न भवः अभव इति, मोक्ष 
इत्यर्थः । 
अभीष: (अभीश:) (xx - 1 ) 
"अभीषुभिः किरणैः' 
एक 
पदम् । 
अशूरस-दर्शन तापशान्ति: (xx - 50 ) 
अशूराणा 
(दुर्भ लाना) सन्दर्शन अशूर 
- 
सन्दर्शन, तेन यस्तावद, तस्य 
शान्तिः, तस्मै इति । बहुपद - 
समासः । 
कामित कामिनीत्वम् 
( XIX - 72 ) 
कामिनीत्वमित्यत्र 
गुणवचनस्येति वार्तिकेन 
दुंवद्भाव विधानं गुणवचनस्यैवेति 
लात्रपुंवद्भावः । 
पद्मान् 
( xix - 34 ) 
अर्धर्चादित्वात 
एवं पाठः । 
प्रवाहैर्भाषाभिरिव (xX11 - 188 ) 
- 
नात्र उपमानोपमेय 
शोणितपूर्व पुरम् (xx:- 8) 
लिङ्गभेद‌दोषः (यथा कुमार - 
148) एवं कविप्रयोगान्तर 
सद्भावात् । 
"हिरण्यपूर्वं कशिपु 
प्रचक्षते . इतिवत्साधुः । 
APPENDIX - VII 
SUBHAS ITAS 
A 
3 
5. 
6. 
7. 
9. 
10. 
1 
भादवाभ्युदय महाकाव्ये सुभाषितानि 
अमृतं यदि लभ्येत किं न गृह्येत मानवैः | 1/3 
स कविः कथ्यते स्रष्टा रमते यत्र भारती । 
रसभावगुणीभूतैरलङ्कारैर्गुणोदयैः I 15 
तदात्वे नूतनं सर्वमायत्यां च पुरातनम् । 
न 
दोषायैतदुभयं न 
न गुणाय च कल्पते ॥ 1 1 6 
न वाचमनमन्यन्ते नर्तक्रीमिन भावुका: ॥ 117 
यथावत्साधकस्येन यावदर्भा सरस्वती । 1115 
प्राप्त स्वपर निर्वाह प्रमाणमिव वादिन: 111/18. 
न हि उद्धेति गृह्येत चतुर्थीचन्द्रचन्द्रिका II / A 
समुद्र इन रत्नानां सतामेकाश्रयोऽभवत् 1 1/30 
वितथा वेदपान्थानां यत्र सायं गृहा गति: 111 / 49 
निखिलकन्धनिवर्तक सन्तियौ विगलनं निगलस्य किमदूतम् । 
नियतिरेकमुखी दुरतिक्रमा 
कृतश्रिया निगुताविळचेतसा ॥ /57. 
M. 
कृतानभिज्ञेष्ठ किमानृशंस्यम् | 0 | 12 
18. 
शुद्धामुचिन्या हि शुभस्य लीला | V 160 
13. 
is 
17. 
19 
यडतीतमतीतमेव तत्करणीयं पुनरायत क्षमम् | 7 | 5 
न हि दुःसाधमचिन्त्यतेजस: ॥ 12/49. 
अनपाय पदाधिरोपणा - 
दपवृत्तो न पुनर्निवर्तते ॥ 28164 
व्यसनं विपदप्यनेहसा 
विनिपातञ्च न कस्य कर्मिणः | 13/74 
अथ वा भुवनेषु दारुणा: 
प्रथिताः पुण्यजना निशाचरा: ॥ [x / ०१ 
अमृतस्य विषस्य च स्वयं 
प्रभवस्थानमभूत् पयोनिधिः । 
बियंतं तद्बेन दर्शितं 
निजसंयोगवियोगड़ायिना ॥ ७/१1. 
छ. 
24 
25. 
झ 
27. 
थ 
भवितव्यतथा शुभाशुभे तदिहैवं परिवर्तितास्पदे । is - १ 
सुलभे सुमणौ कथं मतिः 
क्रमते काचन काचसंग्रहे ॥ 17 / 101. 
यद्धतीतमतीतमेव तत्पुनरेष्यत्यपि पुष्करे क्षणः ॥ 
नियतिः किं न करोति निष्ठुरा / Ix 1116. 
वशिकनृपगृहे सा वासुदेवेऽप्यदी • यत् 
न हि भवति विशेषः कापि नित्योन्जनानाम् ॥ ] 
न कर्मतत्रेषु मतेरमोहता 
न च स्वतन्त्रे स्युरनिष्टहेतव: 1 x 1109 
न वदन्यनिदं परेषु सन्त: 
स्तुतिवाक्येषु यथाश्रुतार्थसिद्धिम् ॥ 154. 
भविमृश्य विपत्तिमापतन्तीं 
न हि तिष्ठन्त्यहितेषु बुद्धिमन्तः ॥ 8 1 56 
किं नाम नाचरति मन्मतहस्तवर्ती 11 x 16949. 
30. 
31. 
32 
38 
अवधीरित कौस्तुभस्स नूनं 
कुरुविन्देषु कुतूहलं विधत्ते ॥ x 157. 
मतिहीन: पशुरेष मर्वणीयः ॥ x 162 
बुद्धिसङ्कोचविषमा गतागतसहायिनी । 
नियति : केन लक्ष्यत निजच्छायानुकारिणी ॥ हा | 12ন 
त्वत्प्रसूतः त्वयैवासौ वचितः चक्रधारणा 
का नाम कृति नस्तस्य परिदेवयित या X / 126 
सम्भवन्त्युपवने वनेऽपि वा 
18 
साव धानमनसां समाधयः ॥ | 10 
34 
प्राणिनां यख लोकनक्षणे 
35 
पूर्वजातिषु भवत्यनुस्मृति | XVI | 34 
नाजिघांसटुपराधिनोऽपि तान् 
नाक नायकगणान् जनार्दनः । 
आनृशंस्यमथवा न भज्यते 
तस्य संश्रितजनेषु जातुचित् ॥ 1 /66. 
37 
: 
अ 
4. 
41. 
हन्त नूनमहिमांशुमण्डलं 
तस्करस्तमसि गोतुमिच्छति ॥ 
| 109, 
क्षुद्र को पविवशस्य देहिनः कस्य नाम न भवत्यपक्रिया ? ॥ 
शिक्षणैकनियतं हिशासनम् XVI- 12424. 
किं नाम नाचति मन्मथहस्तवर्ती ॥ * 169 
स्त्रीणां गतानुगतिक प्रतिपत्तिभाजां 
XVII 118 
ख्यातं तातो भवति कामितकामिनीत्वम् । xix | 74 
अमोघवाचा कविना प्रयुक्तां अन्तर्वतीं सूक्तिमिवानभिज्ञाः । 
xx / 48 
44 
43. 
44 
45. 
किं वा विधौ वैरिणि केन रक्ष्यम् । श्रम 17& विपरिश्रान्तधियो हि वीराः ॥ x 175. 
न चास्ति बन्धोरपि साम्पराये वीरव्रतं धारयतोपकारः । xx 
अप्रमनमतिभिस्सह मित्रैः आप्रवाक्यमवधीर्य न सिद्धिः । 
1 | Txx 
46 
47 
अतस्त्राणाय साधूनां दुष्कृतां दमनं क्षमम् 1 
कढुङ्ग‌रीय रोधो हि कलमोत्सेधकारणम् ॥ xx 
ननु प्रभूणां निरपेक्षभूम्नां 
प्रसाधनं भक्तजने गुणत्वम् ॥ | 12 
48 
नाथोचितं नन्तृषु पारतन्त्र्यम् ॥ xx।। | 13 
XXIII 
49 
प्रपन्नर क्षाप्रतिपन्नदीक्षः सत्याभिसन्धं विदधे सखाय 
XX 
50 
БІ 
52 
किं दुष्करं केशवमाश्रितानाम् || xxl || 44 
प्रणयरसो हि रसप्रकर्षहेतु 21 xxiv 161 
सम्भोगे च प्रवणत्मनसइशाश्वतं ब्रह्मचर्यम् || xxivl9